"Exodus 1:1" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "The verse lists the sons of Jacob who came to Egypt, even though they were already listed in Genesis. Rashi explains that this repetition shows God's love for the Israelites, counting them again and again. It's like a person counting their precious treasures, showing how much they are cherished."
"Exodus 1:8" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "The Torah states that a 'new king arose over Egypt who did not know Joseph.' Rashi offers two interpretations from the Talmud. One is that it was literally a new king. The other is that it was the same king, but he pretended not to know Joseph and issued new, harsh decrees against the Israelites. This highlights the fragility of political favor and how quickly a positive relationship can be forgotten."
"Exodus 1:10" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Pharaoh's plan to 'deal shrewdly' with the Israelites reveals his cunning and fear. The Hebrew word 'havah' (let us) signifies preparation. Pharaoh's fear was not just of the Israelites' numbers, but that they would join Egypt's enemies in war and escape the land. This verse shows how fear can lead to oppression."
"Exodus 1:15" - "keyword": "Shifrah and Puah" - "definition": "The Hebrew midwives who defied Pharaoh's decree to kill the male Israelite babies. Tradition identifies them as Yocheved and Miriam, Moses' mother and sister. Their names are symbolic: Shifrah means 'to beautify' and Puah means 'to coo' or 'cry out', reflecting their roles in caring for the newborns."
"Exodus 1:17" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "The midwives' defiance of Pharaoh was an act of civil disobedience, one of the first in recorded history. They chose to fear God more than the king of Egypt, demonstrating that there is a moral limit to political power. Their courage shows that even in the face of tyranny, individuals can make a choice to uphold what is right."
"Exodus 1:20" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Because the midwives feared God and saved the male infants, God 'made them houses.' Rashi explains this means God established two great dynasties from them: the house of Priesthood (Kohanim) and the house of royalty (the Davidic dynasty). This shows that acts of moral courage and faith are rewarded with enduring legacy."
"Exodus 2:1" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Amram, a man from the house of Levi, remarried his wife Yocheved after they had separated due to Pharaoh's decree against male infants. Rashi notes that Yocheved was 130 years old at the time, yet the Torah calls her a 'daughter of Levi' to signify that she miraculously regained her youth."
"Exodus 2:2" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "When Moses was born, the Torah says his mother saw that he was 'good.' Rashi explains this means the house was filled with light. This suggests that from birth, Moses had a special, divine radiance, a sign of his future role as a leader and prophet."
"Exodus 2:5" - "keyword": "Pharaoh's daughter" - "definition": "The daughter of the tyrannical Pharaoh who discovered and saved Moses from the Nile. She is seen as a righteous gentile who acted with compassion and courage, defying her father's decree. Her act of kindness was essential for the future redemption of Israel."
"Exodus 2:5" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Pharaoh's daughter is an unlikely hero. She had everything to lose by saving the Hebrew baby. Her act of compassion was not just a momentary impulse; she adopted Moses and raised him as her own. This shows that moral courage can be found even in the darkest of places and that tyranny cannot extinguish the human capacity for good."
"Exodus 2:7" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Moses refused to nurse from Egyptian women. Rashi explains that this was because the mouth that was destined to speak with God (the Shechinah) should not be nourished by something impure."
"Exodus 2:12" - "keyword": "Moses kills the Egyptian" - "definition": "Moses, seeing an Egyptian taskmaster beating a Hebrew slave, intervenes and kills the Egyptian. This act, born of a passion for justice, forces Moses to flee Egypt and begin his journey as a fugitive. It is a pivotal moment in his development, showing his innate connection to his people and his willingness to fight for them."
"Exodus 2:12" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides, in his Mishneh Torah, states that while the Egyptian was deserving of death, Moses did not kill him directly. Rather, the Egyptian was put to death 'at the hands of G-d'. This interpretation suggests a divine intervention in the Egyptian's death, highlighting Moses' role as an instrument of God's justice."
"Exodus 2:12" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Moses' act of killing the Egyptian was not just an act of violence, but a profound moment of identity crisis. Having grown up in Pharaoh's palace, he was an outsider to his own people. This act was his first step towards identifying with the suffering of the Israelites and taking a stand against injustice. It was a reckless act, but it was also the beginning of his journey to becoming the leader of his people."
"Exodus 2:25" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "The verse says that God 'knew.' Rashi explains that this means God took notice of their suffering and did not ignore it. It signifies a turning point, where God's attention is now focused on their plight, and the process of redemption is about to begin."
"Exodus 3:2" - "keyword": "The Burning Bush" - "definition": "The event where God appeared to Moses in a bush that was on fire but not consumed. This miraculous event is a symbol of God's presence in the midst of suffering and the eternal nature of the Jewish people. It is where Moses was chosen to lead the Israelites out of Egypt."
"Exodus 3:2" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Why a lowly thornbush? Rashi explains that God chose a simple thornbush to show that He is with the Jewish people in their suffering. Just as the thornbush is humble, so too were the Israelites in their affliction. The fire that did not consume the bush symbolized that the Israelites would not be consumed by their suffering."
"Exodus 3:2" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides, in his Guide for the Perplexed, explains the burning bush as a prophetic vision. The angel in the bush represents the level of prophecy Moses was experiencing. The event was not a physical miracle in the sense of a violation of the laws of nature, but a profound spiritual experience that conveyed deep truths to Moses about God's nature and His relationship with the world."
"Exodus 3:2" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "The burning bush represents the resilience of the Jewish people. Just as the bush burns but is not consumed, so too have the Jewish people endured persecution and suffering throughout history without being destroyed. The fire is the suffering, but the bush is not consumed because God is with them. It is a symbol of hope and the eternal covenant between God and Israel."
"Exodus 3:14" - "keyword": "Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh (I Am That I Am)" - "definition": "The name God reveals to Moses at the burning bush. It is a statement of God's eternal and unchanging nature, and His promise to be with His people in their suffering and redemption. It is a name that speaks of God's active presence in history."
"Exodus 3:14" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that God's name 'Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh' means 'I will be with them in this sorrow as I will be with them in the subjection they will suffer at the hands of other kingdoms.' It is a promise of God's enduring presence and faithfulness through all of Israel's suffering."
"Exodus 3:14" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides understands 'Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh' as a statement of God's necessary existence. God is the only being whose existence is not contingent on anything else. This name teaches that God is the ultimate reality, the foundation of all being."
"Exodus 3:14" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks translates 'Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh' as 'I will be what I will be.' This emphasizes that God is not a static being, but a dynamic force in history. God is a God of action, and He will be known through His deeds. This name is a promise of future redemption and a call to hope."
"Exodus 4:2" - "keyword": "The Signs of Moses" - "definition": "The three miraculous signs God gave Moses to perform to prove to the Israelites that he was sent by God. The staff that turned into a snake, the hand that became leprous, and the water that turned to blood. These signs were not just displays of power, but had deep symbolic meaning."
"Exodus 4:3" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "The staff turning into a snake was a symbolic rebuke to Moses for speaking slanderously about the Israelites. Just as the serpent in the Garden of Eden spoke slander, so too had Moses. This sign was a lesson to Moses about the power and danger of speech."
"Exodus 4:6" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "The sign of the leprous hand was also a symbol of slander. Leprosy in the Torah is often associated with the sin of slander. This sign was another lesson to Moses about the importance of using his words carefully and righteously."
"Exodus 4:9" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides saw the signs of Moses not as the primary basis for faith, but as a means to an end. The ultimate proof of Moses' prophecy was the national revelation at Mount Sinai. The signs were to convince the people to follow Moses to that point, but true faith was to be based on the direct experience of God's presence."
"Exodus 4:10" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Moses' initial reluctance to lead, his claim of being 'slow of speech,' is a sign of true leadership. The greatest leaders are often those who are hesitant to take power, who are aware of their own limitations. Moses' humility and self-doubt are what make him a relatable and inspiring leader."
"Exodus 5:2" - "keyword": "Pharaoh's response to Moses" - "definition": "Pharaoh's defiant response to Moses' request to let the Israelites go: 'Who is the Lord, that I should obey Him and let Israel go? I do not know the Lord and I will not let Israel go.' This response sets the stage for the conflict between Pharaoh and God, and the ten plagues."
"Exodus 5:2" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that Pharaoh's question 'Who is the Lord?' was not a question of ignorance, but of defiance. Pharaoh was saying that he did not recognize any power higher than himself. This was the classic attitude of a pagan king, who saw himself as a god on earth."
"Exodus 5:2" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides explains that Pharaoh's initial refusal to let the Israelites go was an act of free will. However, after the first five plagues, God hardened Pharaoh's heart as a punishment for his initial defiance. This was not to force him to sin, but to ensure that he would receive the full measure of his punishment."
"Exodus 5:2" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks sees Pharaoh's response as a classic example of the 'march of folly.' Pharaoh was a deeply conservative leader who feared change. He was unable to see that his refusal to let the Israelites go would lead to his own destruction. His inability to listen to his advisors and adapt to changing circumstances is a timeless lesson in the dangers of hubris."
"Exodus 6:2" - "keyword": "God's reassurance to Moses" - "definition": "After Moses' initial failure and the worsening of the Israelites' situation, God reassures Moses, revealing His name YHVH and promising to fulfill the covenant with the patriarchs. This moment is a turning point, where God's plan of redemption is reaffirmed."
"Exodus 6:2" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that God's revelation of the name YHVH signifies His attribute of mercy and His faithfulness in fulfilling promises. God is saying that while the patriarchs knew Him as El Shaddai (God Almighty), they did not see the fulfillment of His promises. Now, with the name YHVH, Moses will see those promises fulfilled."
"Exodus 6:2" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides sees this as a deeper revelation of God's essence. The name YHVH represents God's necessary existence, a concept that was not fully grasped by the patriarchs. Moses, with his superior prophetic ability, was able to understand this deeper truth, which gave him the ultimate reassurance of God's power and immutability."
"Exodus 6:2" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks emphasizes the shift from El Shaddai to YHVH as a shift from a God of promises to a God of action. The patriarchs lived with the promise, but now, with Moses, God is entering history to act. This is a God who is not just a creator, but a redeemer. This reassurance is not just for Moses, but for all of Israel, that the time of redemption has come."
"Exodus 7:3" - "keyword": "Hardening of Pharaoh's heart" - "definition": "The repeated hardening of Pharaoh's heart is a central theme in the story of the plagues. It raises questions about free will and divine justice. The commentators explain that Pharaoh initially hardened his own heart, and only later did God harden his heart as a punishment, to ensure that the full measure of justice would be carried out."
"Exodus 7:3" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that for the first five plagues, the Torah says that Pharaoh hardened his own heart. It was only for the last five plagues that God hardened Pharaoh's heart. This shows that God gave Pharaoh a chance to repent, but he refused. The hardening of his heart was a punishment for his initial defiance."
"Exodus 7:3" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides explains that God's hardening of Pharaoh's heart was a withdrawal of the possibility of repentance. Because Pharaoh had sinned so grievously and of his own free will, God removed from him the ability to repent, so that he would suffer the full consequences of his actions. This is a punishment reserved for the most wicked."
"Exodus 7:3" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks offers a different perspective, suggesting that God hardened Pharaoh's heart to restore his free will. After so many plagues, Pharaoh would have been coerced into letting the Israelites go. By hardening his heart, God gave him the strength to make a free choice, so that his ultimate defeat would be a true demonstration of God's power."
"Exodus 10:1" - "keyword": "Plague of Locusts" - "definition": "The eighth plague that God brought upon Egypt. A massive swarm of locusts covered the land, devouring all the crops and vegetation that had been left after the plague of hail. This plague was a devastating blow to Egypt's food supply and economy."
"Exodus 10:1" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi notes that the plague of locusts was a particularly severe punishment because it destroyed the very source of life and sustenance for the Egyptians. It was a clear demonstration of God's power over nature and His ability to bring a mighty empire to its knees."
"Exodus 10:1" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides would have likely viewed the plague of locusts as a severe, but natural, event. He believed that God works through the laws of nature, and that miracles are not a violation of those laws, but rather an unusual or unexpected manifestation of them. The plague of locusts was a demonstration of God's power and providence within the natural order."
"Exodus 10:1" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks sees the plague of locusts as a turning point in the plagues. It was the first plague that destroyed the food supply, and it was a clear sign that Pharaoh's stubbornness was leading his people to ruin. Pharaoh's own advisors begged him to let the Israelites go, but he refused. This shows how leaders can become so blinded by their own power that they are unable to see the destruction they are causing."
"Exodus 12:3" - "keyword": "The Passover Sacrifice" - "definition": "The central ritual of the Passover holiday, where a lamb is sacrificed and its blood is placed on the doorposts of the Israelite homes. This act of faith was a sign for God to 'pass over' the Israelite homes during the plague of the firstborn. The lamb is then eaten in a special meal called the Seder."
"Exodus 12:3" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that the word 'Pesach' means to 'pass over' or 'skip.' God 'skipped' over the Israelite homes when He smote the Egyptian firstborn. The Passover sacrifice is a commemoration of this divine protection."
"Exodus 12:3" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides sees the Passover sacrifice as a powerful educational tool. It was a way to transition the Israelites away from idolatry and towards the worship of the one true God. The sacrifice was a way of demonstrating faith and commitment to God, and it was a central part of the process of becoming a free people."
"Exodus 12:3" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks sees the Passover sacrifice as a symbol of freedom. The lamb was a god in Egypt, and by sacrificing it, the Israelites were making a radical statement that they were no longer slaves to Egyptian culture or religion. They were choosing to be free, and to serve God alone."
"Exodus 13:2" - "keyword": "Consecration of the Firstborn" - "definition": "The commandment to sanctify the firstborn male of every womb, both human and animal. This is a reminder of the tenth plague, when God spared the firstborn of Israel. The firstborn are to be redeemed through a special ceremony called Pidyon HaBen."
"Exodus 13:2" - "source": "Rashi" - "explanation": "Rashi explains that the consecration of the firstborn is a direct result of the plague of the firstborn. Because God spared the Israelite firstborn, they now belong to Him. This is a sign of God's ownership and a reminder of His salvation."
"Exodus 13:2" - "source": "Maimonides" - "explanation": "Maimonides sees the consecration of the firstborn as a way of instilling gratitude and humility. By redeeming the firstborn, the Israelites are acknowledging that their lives are a gift from God. It is a way of remembering the Exodus and the special relationship between God and Israel."
"Exodus 13:2" - "source": "Rabbi Sacks" - "explanation": "Rabbi Sacks emphasizes that the consecration of the firstborn is a rejection of the pagan idea that the firstborn has special powers or privileges. In Judaism, the firstborn is not inherently superior, but is dedicated to God. This is a radical statement about the nature of holiness and the equality of all people before God."
