

=== Page 1 ===

For a meaningful, fun and uplifting 
Passover Seder
הגדה של פסח
FLLFIFÇ
The Chabad.org

=== Page 2 ===

For a meaningful, fun and uplifting 
Passover Seder
הגדה של פסח
Haggadah
The Chabad.org

=== Page 3 ===

The Chabad.org Haggadah 
Third Edition
© Copyright 2023 by Chabad.org, all rights reserved.
Created by 
Chabad.org
788 Eastern Parkway, Suite 405, Brooklyn NY 11213
Published by 
Kehot Publication Society
770 Eastern Parkway, Brooklyn NY 11213
Concept & Targum Rabbi Tzvi Freeman
Executive Editor Rabbi Meir Simcha Kogan
Creative Director Rabbi Motti Seligson
Executive Director Rabbi Zalman Shmotkin
Cover & Illustrations Sefira Lightstone © sefiracreative.com
Layout & Design Racheli Chazan, Shneor Cortez, Sholom Ber Gurary and Spotlight Design
Rabbinic Review Rabbi Avrohom Altein and Rabbi Levi Friedman
Editorial Team Rabbi Simcha Bart, Chani Benjaminson, Rabbi Avi Eskinazi,  
Rabbi Alex Heppenheimer, Rabbi Mendy Kaminker, Yaakov Ort,  
Rabbi Menachem Posner and Rabbi Yehuda Shurpin
Hebrew Text Hebrew text of the Haggadah is copyright Kehot Publication Society and is 
used with permission.
We hope you enjoy this Haggadah and that it enhances your Passover Seder. Please share your feedback and 
suggestions with us at feedback@chabad.org. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without prior permission from 
the copyright holder.
ISBN  978-0-8266-0627-3 (hardc over) 
978-0-8266-0628-0 (paperback)
5 7 9 11 13 14 12 10 8 6
The publication contains sacred literature. Please do not deface or discard.

=== Page 4 ===

Table of Contents
A Passover Message ......................................................4
Introduction ...................................................................... 6
How to Use This Haggadah .......................................7
Preparing for Passover
Getting Rid of Chametz ..............................................8
Order of the Pesach Offering ................................. 14
Matzah ................................................................................16
Pre-Passover Shopping List ...................................18
What Y
ou’ll Need for the Seder.............................19
Candle Lighting .............................................................20
The Seder
Setting Up the Seder Plate ......................................21
Tonight’s Program .......................................................22
Kadesh · Kiddush on Wine .................................... 24
Urchatz · 
Wash Hands, No Blessing .................30
Karpas · 
Eat a Vegetable in Salt Water ...........30
Y
achatz · Break a Matzah .......................................31
Magid · 
Tell the Story ................................................32
Rachtza · W
ash Hands with a Blessing .........70
Motzi · Blessing on the Matzah .......................... 71
Matzah ·
 Blessing on the Mitzvah ..................... 71
Maror ·
 Bitter Leaves for Eating.......................... 72
Korech · Bitter Leaves in a Wrapping ...............73
Shulchan Orech · 
A Festive Meal ......................74
Tzafun · 
Eat the Afikoman .....................................74
Beirach · 
Thank God for the Meal .................... 75
Hallel-Nirtzah · 
Praise God .................................86
Appendix
Shalom Aleichem & Eshet Chayil .....................104
Kiddush for Daytime ................................................ 107
Hamotzi ............................................................................110
Sources .............................................................................. 111
ב"ה

=== Page 5 ===

A Passover Message From the Rebbe 
Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, of righteous memory
T
he festival of Passover calls for early and elaborate prepara ‑
tions to make the Jewish home fitting for the great festival. It 
is not phy
sical preparedness alone that is required of us, but also 
spiritual preparedness—for in the life of the Jew the physical and 
spiritual are closely linked together, especially in the celebration 
of our Sabbath and festivals.
On Passover we celebrate the liberation of the Jewish people 
from Egyptian slavery and, together with it, the liberation from, 
and negation of, the ancient Egyptian system and way of life, the 
“abominations of Egypt.” Thus we celebrate our physical libera ‑
tion together with our spiritual freedom. Indeed, there cannot 
be one without the other; ther e can be no r
eal freedom without 
accepting the precepts of our Torah guiding our daily life; pure 
and holy life eventually leads to real freedom.
It is said: “In every generation each Jew should see himself as 
though he personally had been liberated from Egypt.” This is to 
say that the lesson of Passover has always  a timely message for 
the individual Jew. The story of Passover is the story of the spe ‑
cial Divine Providence which alone determines the fate of our 
people. 
What is happening in the outside world need not affect 
us; we might be singled out for suffering, G‑d forbid, amid gen ‑
eral prosperity, and likewise singled out for safety amid a general 
plague or catas tr
ophe. The story of our enslavement and liber ‑
ation, of which Passover tells us, give ample illustration of this. 
For the fate of our people is de
termined by its adherence to G‑d 
and His Prophets.
This lesson is emphasized by the three principal symbols of the 
Seder, concerning which our Sages said that unless the Jew ex ‑
plains their significance he has not observed the Seder fittingly: 
Pesac
h [the Paschal Offering], Matzah and Maror [bitter herbs]. 
Using these symbols in their chronological order and in accor ‑
dance with the Haggadah explanation, we may say: the Jew can 
av
oid Maror (bitterness of life) only through Pesach (G‑d’s special 
care ‘passing over’ and saving the Jewish homes even in the midst 
4

=== Page 6 ===

of the greatest plague), and Matzah—then the very catastrophe 
and the enemies of the Jews will work for the benefit of the Jews, 
driving them in great haste out of “Mitzraim” [Egypt], the place 
of perversion and darkness, and placing them under the beam 
of light and holiness.
One other important thing we must remember. The celebration 
of the festival of freedom must be connected with the com ‑
mandment “You shall relate it to your son.” The formation and 
exis
tence of the Jewish home, as of the Jewish people as a whole, 
is dependent upon the upbringing of the young generation, 
both boys and girls: the wise and the wicked (temporarily), the 
simple and the one who knows not what to ask. Just as we can ‑
not shirk our responsibility towards our child by the excuse that 
“m
y child is a wise one; he will find his own way in life, therefore 
no education is necessary for him”; so we must not despair by 
thinking “the child is a wicked one; no education will help him.” 
For all Jewish children, boys and girls, are “G‑d’s children,” and it 
is our sacred duty to see to it that they all live up to their above‑
mentioned title; and this we can achieve only through a kosher 
Je
wish education, in full adherence to G‑d’s Torah. Then we all 
will merit the realization of our ardent hopes: “In the next year 
may we be free; in the next year may we be in Jerusalem!1”
—Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson
5
“In every generation each Jew should 
see himself as though he personally 
had been liberated from Egypt.”

=== Page 7 ===

6
The Haggadah 
This Is Not an Introduction 
Here’s some stuff you gotta read. 
Crucial to understand this Haggadah. 
Y
es, it’s a traditional Haggadah. It follows 
all the standard texts and commentaries 
from the whole gamut of Jewish history, like 
a thousand voices harmonized into a single 
symphony. 
But that’s the thing about the traditional Hag‑
gadah: You’ll find everything in there—except 
your own voice. That you have to add yourself. 
And that’s vital. Because, as the Haggadah 
says, you have to tell this story as though it 
happened to you. Because, in truth, it is a sto ‑
ry that happens to each one of us in our lives. 
Which is where this particular Haggadah 
comes in. We haven’t changed the tradition‑
al Haggadah. We’ve just made it easier to find 
yourself there. 
You see, instead of simply translating the 
words, we followed an ancient Jewish tradi‑
tion called targum. That’s when a translation 
lays all the context, implications and back ‑
stage story out in the open, in clear, simple 
language. 
We also made sure to use modern language 
and idioms. And we did it in a way that should 
prove fun for all. 
Our goal was to simulate as best we could a 
Seder which you, your family, and friends 
might have improvised organically, as though 
the classic Haggadah of our ancestors was 
flowing naturally through your souls, minds 
and mouths.
The Seder table is a timeless space. 
The Haggadah contains the story that creates 
that space. 
With this Haggadah, you will bring that time ‑
lessness to your table and into your home.

=== Page 8 ===

INTRODUCTION
7
How to Use This Haggadah 
Use this Haggadah however you like, adding your 
own family customs, fitting it to your particular 
situation. But here are a few suggestions that can 
help your Seder really take off:
• First off
, a no‑brainer: Go ar
ound the table and 
give everyone a chance to read. Simple—and it 
works. We’ve even marked suggested places to 
switch off readers with these icons:  
• But you still need to use those brains. Pace 
y
ourself. Determine how much time you have, 
and keep things moving so that you can get 
through everything without having to rush 
anything. 
• If you w
ant to go all the way, divide up roles. 
One person for each of the four children. 
Someone else to be the parent. Choose some ‑
one to be Rabbi Eliezer. Someone else can be 
Ben Zoma. Go through the Haggadah in ad‑
vance and see how it can work out. Or just 
work it out on the fly. 
• In some communities
, everyone reads every 
word of the Haggadah in Hebrew. If you want 
to go all the way, try this: Each time you’re 
about to switch readers, have everyone read 
the Hebrew together first.
• Want to mak
e someone feel real important? 
Appoint someone as “instruction reader.” 
• And while we’r
e thinking ahead already: Ask 
each person who is invited to your Seder to 
prepare something short to say or explain at 
the Seder. Tell them they can research every ‑
thing online beforehand. 
• For a r
eal wild and wonderful Seder, watch 
“How to Make a Wild & Wonderful Passover 
Seder” at Chabad.org/1156813. You’ll find there 
a list of props that you’ll want to get before 
Passover, and other printouts that will come in 
handy. After watching, go through this Hagga‑
dah and pencil in your itinerary.
25 KADESH
Kiddush when the Seder is not on a Friday or Saturday night:
You’ll find the Kiddush for those days on the next pages.
אַתְקִינוּ סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא עִלָּאָה, דָּא הִיא 
סְעוּדָתָא דְּקוּדְשָׁא בְּרִיךְ הוּא וּשְׁכִינְתֵּיהּ: 
PREPARE the feast of the supernal King! This is the feast 
of the Holy One, may He be blessed, and His Shechinah.
 Make sure it’s after nightfall. Everyone stands up, their full cup in hand, and says:
 Someone out loud or everyone
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
Attention Everybody! 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of  
the vine. 
If you want to say that first blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm 
boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר בָּנוּ 
מִכָּל עָם, וְרוֹמְמָנוּ מִכָּל לָשׁוֹן, וְקִדְּשָׁנוּ 
בְּמִצְוֹ תָיו. וַתִּתֶּן לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּאַהֲבָה 
מוֹעֲדִים לְשִׂמְחָה, חַגִּים וּזְמַנִּים לְשָׂשׂוֹן, 
אֶת יוֹם חַג הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה, וְאֶת יוֹם טוֹב 
מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, זְמַן חֵרוּתֵנוּ, מִקְרָא 
קֹדֶשׁ, זֵכֶר לִיצִיאַת מִצְרָיִם. כִּי בָנוּ 
בָחַרְתָּ וְאוֹתָנוּ קִדַּשְׁתָּ מִכָּל הָעַמִּים, 
וּמוֹעֲדֵי קָדְשֶׁךָ בְּשִׂמְחָה וּבְשָׂשׂוֹן 
הִנְחַלְתָּנוּ: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, מְקַדֵּשׁ 
יִשְׂרָאֵל וְהַזְּמַנִּים: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has chosen us from among all 
people, and raised us above all tongues, and made 
us holy through His mitzvahs. 
And You, God, our God, have lovingly given us 
festivals for happiness, feasts and festive seasons 
for rejoicing! 
This day of the matzah feast and this day to be 
called holy, the season of our freedom, to be 
called holy, commemorating the Exodus from 
Egypt. For You have chosen us and sanctified us 
from all the nations, and You gave us Your holy 
festivals as a heritage in happiness and in joy. 
Blessed are You, God, who sanctifies Israel and 
the festive seasons! 
 Don’t say this if you already said it when lighting the holiday candles: 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ 
וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לִזְמַן הַזֶּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, 
and gotten us all the way to this point in time! 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm  
sheh-heh-kheh-yah-noo veh-kee-yeh-mah-noo veh-hig-ee-ah-noo liz-mahn hah-zeh.
Now sit, lean to the left and drink your first of the four cups of wine!
24
JUST LIKE OUR ancestors had to first leave Egypt before they could get 
the Torah, we first have to leave behind the busy, buzzing hullabaloo of 
the world so we can enter a timeless time. A space where all of us, our 
great-grandparents, our ancestors who left Egypt and every last Jew that 
lives, has lived or will live, all live all at once, as a single person. 
How are we going to enter that space? 
With a full cup of wine. 
Wine is tonight’s representative of freedom, so freely fill your cup to the 
brim. 
On other nights, one person makes Kiddush and everyone else gets a sip. Tonight is 
different. Everyone gets their own cup, and everyone drinks it down. Because this is 
cup #1 of tonight’s obligatory four cups.
Make sure each cup holds at least three ounces (86 ml).
At the end of Kiddush, sit down, lean to your left, and drink the whole cup. If that’s too 
much, then most of the cup. Well, at least enough wine to fill one cheek. For most of 
us, that’s about one and a half ounces (45 ml).
Kadesh
קַדֵּשׁ 
Kiddush on Wine
Hebrew Text
Section Tab
Translation
Transliteration
Instruction
Vital info 
you should 
know in 
advance
Reading Guide Insights 
from our 
sages
This icon denotes an 
additional pearl of wisdom. 
Have someone share this 
insight from our sages. 
This icon denotes a link to 
access more information 
before the holiday.

=== Page 9 ===

8
Passover Preparations
Who is this chametz guy, and how do I get rid of him?
Chametz means “leavened grain.” On Passover, it’s not just 
that we don’t eat chametz, we mustn’t even own it. 
H
ere’s a simple rule of thumb: If a food 
or drink contains even a trace of wheat, 
barley, rye, oats, spelt, or their derivatives, and 
wasn’t guarded against leavening or fermen‑
tation—it’s chametz. Which means that any 
processed food or drink today can be assumed 
to be chametz unless certified otherwise. 
Problem is, our homes are full of this stuff. 
That’s why we go on a full cleaning and 
search‑and‑destr
oy mission during the weeks 
before Passover. 
Here’s how:
Target any and all areas where food may enter 
(you don’t have to bother with places where 
food never comes). Move the furniture, oven 
and fridge. Search beneath the sofa cushions 
and clean out whatever other hard ‑to‑r
each 
places that are reachable. Wipe chairs, cup ‑
boards and bookshelves clean.
Don’t forget your office. Even if you don’t own 
your office, you own any food you keep there. 
Plus any lockers or storage places you use at 
work or at school. Check the pockets of cloth‑
ing in the closet. And then, of course, there’s 
that mobile snack bar of yours, the car.
The prime target, of course, is the kitchen. Af‑
ter cleaning it, you can use foil or paper to line 
all surfaces that may come in contact with 
food. You can also run the self ‑clean 
cycle on 
your oven, if it supports it.
You’ll want separate utensils and appliances 
for Passover use. If this is not possible, some 
kitchen items can be made kosher for Pass ‑
over. 
 See Chabad.org/117233 for more on this.

=== Page 10 ===

PASSOVER PREPARATIONS  
9
WHAT’S SO TERRIBLE about chametz? After all, we eat it the whole 
year long, no problem.
And if it’s just a commemoration of leaving Egypt, why the concern over 
less than a crumb?
In fact, Rabbi Isaac Luria, the 16th‑centur
y master kabbalist, known as 
the Arizal, taught that if you’re careful to avoid consuming even the 
smallest amount of chametz on Passover, God will protect you from 
committing any misdeeds the entire year.
But why? What’s the connection?
Well, it’s like Rabbi Alexandri says in the Talmud (Berachot 17a): 
“Master of the Universe! It’s obvious to You that we want to do what You 
want done. So what is holding us back? It’s the sourdough that makes 
the bread rise!”
You see, a little bit of chametz makes a little dough into a big loaf of hot 
air. And that pretty much describes the fundamental gameplay of all 
that imprisons all of us.
Like the chametz that takes your healthy need to earn an honest living 
and blows it up into a desperate need for recognition and yet more rec‑
ognition.
Or like the chametz that mixes in when you are about to do a beautiful 
mitzvah out of the sincerity of your heart, saying, “Yes! Do it! People will 
say you are such a tzadik!”
Or the chametz that appears when you are studying the wisdom of To‑
rah and whispers, “Soon you will be wiser than anyone else!”
It’s that chametz that ties every thought, every word, every deed you do 
to your ego, as though your existence is somehow invalidated if you do 
not occupy more and more space every day—with nothing but hot air.
We are its prisoner. It is our taskmaster. It has stolen our lives from us, 
rendering us all subjects of an oppressive world we must satisfy and 
please. 
On Passover we are empowered to break our chains of bondage. To do a 
mitzvah only because it connects us to our God. To learn Torah wisdom 
only to become one with divine wisdom. To be ourselves. To escape 
bondage to anything in this world. To be free.
And we begin by eradicating a physical manifestation of that ego from 
our world. Torah provides a powerful tool: Just by temporarily eliminat‑
ing chametz from our lives, we can set ourselves free.

=== Page 11 ===

10
The Sellout
N
ow you’re thinking, “What about my 30 ‑year single‑malt whis‑
k
ey and my kid’s Cheerio ‑Man mas
terpiece?” For these items 
and anything else you don’t want to dispose of, there’s an alternative: 
Simply ensure that they do not belong to you during Passover. Here’s 
how:
1. Gather all the chame
tz you want to save—
food, drinks, and any utensils that might 
still have food stuck to them.
2. Stor
e it all away in a closet or room.
3. Loc
k the area or tape it shut. 
4. Clean utensils don’t need to be lock
ed up 
with all the chametz. Just keep them clos‑
eted off from your Passover utensils, so 
they won’t be used by mistake.
5. Authorize an experienced rabbi to make a 
leg
ally binding sale according to both Jew‑
ish and civil law. 
 Visit Chabad.org/Chametz to do this online. 
The rabbi will sell all your chametz just be ‑
fore Passover and buy it back as soon as the 
holiday is over. The night Passover ends, after 
the rabbi has purchased back your chametz, 
you can already break out that single malt for 
a l’chaim.

=== Page 12 ===

PASSOVER PREPARATIONS  
11
The Chametz Search-  
and-Destroy Mission
The Night Before Passover * 
Once the house is Passover‑tidy , it’s time to 
do the search‑and‑destr
oy ritual.
H
ere’s a mitzvah that kids love to be part 
of and that will stay with them forever. 
Before the search, carefully wrap ten pieces of 
bread in paper and hide them throughout the 
house. Keep a list of where you hid them (your 
smartphone’s camera comes in handy here).
Search your home for the chametz with a 
lighted candle. Aside from the candle, the cus‑
tom is to take along a feather, a wooden spoon 
and a paper bag (all to be burned later with the 
chametz). The feather is meant for sweeping 
any chametz you might find into the bag. The 
spoon is to stick in the bag (with the handle 
sticking out) when you tie it all up, to help it 
all burn.
Away from home for the holiday? Ask your 
rabbi when and how to do the search.
* Or the night befor e that. In some years (such as 2025 and 2045), the day before Passover is Shabbat. In 
that case, you’ll need to follow these instructions on Thursday night and Friday morning.

=== Page 13 ===

12
The Day Before Passover *
L
ike we said earlier, on Passover, it’s not 
just that we don’t eat chametz, we mustn’t 
even own it. 
Well, now is the last chance to sell your cha‑
metz! Make sure to do it before the time limit 
for chametz‑burning
.
You can still eat chametz for breakfast, as long 
as you finish before the chametz-eating time  
 
limit. After that, eat only kosher ‑f or‑Passo ver 
foods.
Before the chametz-burning time limit, 
make a fire and burn the chametz bag from 
last night, plus any other leftover chametz 
that hasn’t been sold. 
 To find your local chametz‑eating and chame tz‑
burning time limits
, visit Chabad.org/PassoverTimes.
* What if it’s one of those y ears (like 2025 and 2045) when the day before Passover is Shabbat—which 
means you’re doing all this on Friday? You can eat chametz until Saturday morning, but you should sell 
your chametz and burn that bag on Friday before the chametz‑burning time limit
. Then, on Saturday 
morning, you’ll need to eat and dispose of any remaining chametz by the cut‑off time listed f
or that day. 
Make sure you check for that time before Shabbat.
 Best w
ay to dispose of chametz on Shabbat is to crumble it up and flush it down the toilet. If you just toss 
it in the trash, it’s still in your possession. 
 For more details on this Shabbat situation, see Chabad.org/5025853.
After nightfall, gather the family, light a candle, and say:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ עַל בִּעוּר חָמֵץ:   בְּמִצְוֹ 
)Listeners:(אָמֵן 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has made us holy with His 
mitzvahs, and commanded us regarding the 
removal of chametz.
(Listeners: Amen)
• Thoroughly search your home and car for any chametz.
• Bag the evidence and store it away for tomorr
ow’s chametz-burning ceremony.
• After the search, make the following declaration:
כָּל 
חֲמִירָא וַחֲמִיעָא דְּאִכָּא 
בִרְשׁוּתִי, דְּלָא חֲמִיתֵיהּ וּדְלָא 
בִעַרְתֵּיהּ וּדְלָא יְדַעְנָא לֵיהּ, לִבָּטֵל 
וְלֶהֱוֵי הֶפְקֵר כְּעַפְרָא דְאַרְעָא: 
ALL leaven and anything leavened that is in 
my possession—which I have neither seen nor 
removed, and about which I am unaware—shall 
be considered naught and ownerless as the dust 
of the earth.

=== Page 14 ===

PASSOVER PREPARATIONS  
13
After throwing your chametz in the fire,* make the following declaration:
כָּל 
חֲמִירָא וַחֲמִיעָא דְּאִכָּא 
בִרְשׁוּתִי, דַּחֲזִיתֵיהּ וּדְלָא 
חֲזִיתֵיהּ, דַּחֲמִיתֵיהּ וּדְלָא חֲמִיתֵיהּ, 
דְּבִעַרְתֵּיהּ וּדְלָא בִעַרְתֵּיהּ, לִבָּטֵל 
וְלֶהֱוֵי הֶפְקֵר כְּעַפְרָא דְאַרְעָא: 
ALL leaven and anything leavened that is in 
my possession—whether I have seen it or not, 
whether I have observed it or not, whether I have 
removed it or not—shall be considered naught 
and ownerless as the dust of the earth.
You are now chametz-free—and free to enjoy the liberating Seder experience and the Festival of Freedom.
While the chametz is burning,** say this chametz-burning meditation/prayer:
יְהִי 
רָצוֹן מִלְּפָנֶיךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
וֵאלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, כְּשֵׁם שֶׁאֲנִי 
מְבַעֵר חָמֵץ מִבֵּיתִי וּמֵרְשׁוּתִי, כַּךְ 
תְּבַעֵר אֶת כָּל הַחִיצוֹנִים, וְאֶת רוּחַ 
הַטֻּמְאָה תַּעֲבִיר מִן הָאָרֶץ, וְאֶת יִצְרֵנוּ 
הָרַע תַּעֲבִירֵהוּ מֵאִתָּנוּ, וְתִתֵּן לָנוּ 
לֵב בָּשָׂר לְעָבְדְּךָ בֶּאֱמֶת, וְכָל סִטְרָא 
אָחֳרָא וְכָל הַקְּלִפּוֹת וְכָל הָרִשְׁעָה 
בֶּעָשָׁן תִּכְלֶה, וְתַעֲבִיר מֶמְשֶׁלֶת זָדוֹן 
מִן הָאָרֶץ, וְכָל הַמְּעִיקִים לַשְּׁכִינָה 
תְּבַעֲרֵם בְּרוּחַ בָּעֵר וּבְרוּחַ מִשְׁפָּט 
כְּשֵׁם שֶׁבִּעַרְתָּ אֶת מִצְרַיִם וְאֶת 
 אֱלֹהֵיהֶם בַּיָּמִים הָהֵם בִּזְמַן הַזֶּה, 
אָמֵן סֶלָה: 
LET a new desire emerge from within You, God, 
our God and God of our fathers, that just as I have 
eradicated chametz from my home and from my 
possession, so You will eradicate all the forces of 
evil from Your world and obliterate the spirit of 
impurity from the earth.
Eliminate our wicked impulses from within us 
and give us a heart of flesh so we may truly serve 
You.
May all the Side of Otherness (“sitra achra”), 
and all the thick disguises that conceal the 
divine life within them (“kelipot”), along with all 
wickedness, go up in smoke as You vanquish the 
dominance of evil from the earth.
And all the oppressors of the Shechinah—may 
You obliterate them with a spirit of vanquishment 
and a spirit of justice just as You vanquished 
Ancient Egypt and its deities in those days at this 
time.
Amen, Selah!
* Or disposing of it on Shabbat , when Passover begins on 
Saturday night.
** On years when Passo
ver begins on Saturday night, make 
sure you say the second “Kol Chamira”—“ All leaven…” 
declaration (printed above) on Shabbat morning, after 
disposing of the remains of the chametz that you’ve 
eaten.

=== Page 15 ===

14
Order of the Pesach Offering
As we went to print with this edition, Moshiach had not yet arrived and the necessary conditions 
for bringing a Pesach offering were still lacking. Under such circumstances, the custom is to 
study out loud the order and rules for this offering at the time when it was brought, namely, the 
afternoon before the Seder night. So we say this immediately after the Mincha prayer.
There are three planes upon which you can do any mitzvah: You can think about it, you can 
speak about it, and you can do it. Of course, doing it is the most important, but what if you 
can’t? You can still be engaged in the holiness and divine beauty of the mitzvah by immersing 
your mind in its thought-dimension and filling your mouth with its words.
קָרְבַּן 
פֶּסַח מֵבִיא מִן הַכְּבָשִׂים 
אוֹ מִן הָעִזִּים זָכָר בֶּן שָׁנָה, 
וְשׁוֹחֲטוֹ בָּעֲזָרָה בְּכָל מָקוֹם, אַחַר חֲצוֹת 
אַרְבָּעָה עָשָׂר דַּוְקָא, וְאַחַר שְׁחִיטַת תָּמִיד 
שֶׁל בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם, וְאַחַר הֲטָבַת נֵרוֹת שֶׁל 
בֵּין הָעַרְבַּיִם. וְאֵין שׁוֹחֲטִין אֶת הַפֶּסַח עַל 
הֶחָמֵץ. וְאִם שָׁחַט קוֹדֶם לַתָּמִיד, כָּשֵׁר, 
וּבִלְבָד שֶׁיְּהֵא אַחֵר מְמָרֵס בְּדַם הַפֶּסַח 
כְּדֵי שֶׁלֹּא יִקָּרֵשׁ עַד שֶׁיִּזְרְקוּ דַם הַתָּמִיד, 
וְאַחַר כָּךְ יִזְרְקוּ דַם הַפֶּסַח זְרִיקָה אַחַת 
כְּנֶגֶד הַיְסוֹד. וְכֵיצַד עוֹשִׂין? שָׁחַט הַשּׁוֹחֵט, 
וְקִבֵּל הַכֹּהֵן הָרִאשׁוֹן שֶׁבְּרֹאשׁ הַשּׁוּרָה וְנָתַן 
לַחֲבֵרוֹ, וַחֲבֵרוֹ לַחֲבֵרוֹ, וְהַכֹּהֵן הַקָּרוֹב אֵצֶל 
הַמִּזְבֵּחַ זוֹרְקוֹ זְרִיקָה אַחַת כְּנֶגֶד הַיְסוֹד, 
וְחוֹזֵר הַכְּלִי רֵיקָן לַחֲבֵרוֹ, וַחֲבֵרוֹ לַחֲבֵרוֹ, 
וּמְקַבֵּל כְּלִי הַמָּלֵא תְּחִלָּה וְאַחַר כָּךְ מַחֲזִיר 
הָרֵיקָן. וְהָיוּ שׁוּרוֹת שֶׁל בָּזִיכֵי כֶסֶף וְשׁוּרוֹת 
שֶׁל בָּזִיכֵי זָהָב. וְלֹא הָיוּ לַבָּזִיכִין שׁוּלַיִם, 
שֶׁמָּא יַנִּיחֵם וְיִקָּרֵשׁ הַדָּם. אַחַר כָּךְ תּוֹלִין 
אֶת הַפֶּסַח וּמַפְשִׁיטִין אוֹתוֹ כֻּלּוֹ, וְקוֹרְעִין 
אוֹתוֹ, וּמְמַחִין אֶת קְרָבָיו עַד שֶׁיֵּצֵא הַפֶּרֶשׁ, 
וּמוֹצִיאִין אֶת הָאֵימוּרִים, וְהֵם: הַחֵלֶב 
שֶׁעַל הַקֶּרֶב, וְיוֹתֶרֶת הַכָּבֵד, וּשְׁתֵּי כְלָיוֹת 
וְהַחֵלֶב שֶׁעֲלֵיהֶן, וְהָאַלְיָה לְעֻמַּת הֶעָצֶה, 
וְנוֹתְנָם בִּכְלִי שָׁרֵת, וּמוֹלְחָם וּמַקְטִירָם 
הַכֹּהֵן עַל גַּבֵּי הַמִּזְבֵּחַ כָּל אֶחָד לְבַדּוֹ. 
וְהַשְּׁחִיטָה וְהַזְּרִיקָה וּמִחוּי קְרָבָיו וְהֶקְטֵר 
חֲלָבָיו דּוֹחִין אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת, וּשְׁאָר עִנְיָנָיו 
FOR a Pesach offering, you can bring a lamb or a goat, male and 
in its first year. 
It could be slaughtered anywhere in the Temple court, but only 
after midday of the fourteenth of Nissan. It also had to be after 
the slaughtering of the daily afternoon offering, and after the 
afternoon cleaning of the cups of the menorah. 
It’s forbidden to slaughter the Pesach offering as long as you 
have chametz in your possession. 
If, however, you slaughtered it before the daily afternoon 
offering, it is still acceptable—as long as you have someone stir 
the blood of this offering so that it doesn’t congeal before the 
blood of the daily afternoon offering is sprinkled.
Next, the blood of that Pesach offering needs to be sprinkled 
once toward the base of the altar. How was that done? 
Kohanim formed lines from the slaughtering area to the altar. 
As soon as someone slaughtered the animal, the kohen at the 
head of the line collected its blood as it poured into a container. 
He handed that over to the next in line, and that kohen to the 
next, and so on, until the kohen nearest the altar sprinkled it 
once toward the base of the altar. 
That kohen then returned the empty container to the one 
before him, and that kohen to the next, and so on. Each kohen 
was continually receiving full containers and passing back 
empty ones, always making sure to receive a full one before 
passing back the empty one.
There were rows of silver containers and rows of golden 
containers. To prevent the blood from congealing if it was still 
for too long, none of them had flat bottoms. 
Next, they hung the Pesach offering, flayed it completely, tore it 
open, and cleansed its bowels until all the waste came out. 
They then took out the parts offered on the altar—the fat on the 
entrails, the lobe of the liver, the two kidneys with the fat on 
them, and the tail up to the backbone—and placed them in a 
ritual container. 
A kohen then salted them and burned them upon the altar, 
each one individually.

=== Page 16 ===

PESACH OFFERING
15
אֵינָם דּוֹחִין אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת. וְכֵן אֵין מוֹלִיכִין 
אֶת הַפֶּסַח לַבַּיִת כְּשֶׁחָל בְּשַׁבָּת, אֶלָּא כַּת 
הָאַחַת הֵם מִתְעַכְּבִים עִם פִּסְחֵיהֶם בְּהַר 
הַבַּיִת, וְהַכַּת הַשְּׁנִיָּה יוֹשֶׁבֶת לָהּ בַּחֵיל, 
וְהַשְּׁלִישִׁית בִּמְקוֹמָהּ עוֹמֶדֶת. חָשְׁכָה, יָצְאוּ 
וְצָלוּ פִסְחֵיהֶם. בִּשְׁלֹשָׁה כִתּוֹת הַפֶּסַח נִשְׁחָט, 
וְאֵין כַּת פְּחוּתָה מִשְּׁלֹשִׁים אֲנָשִׁים. נִכְנְסָה 
כַּת הָרִאשׁוֹנָה, נִתְמַלְּאָה הָעֲזָרָה, נוֹעֲלִין 
אוֹתָהּ. וּבְעוֹד שֶׁהֵם שׁוֹחֲטִין וּמַקְרִיבִין אֶת 
הָאֵימוּרִים, קוֹרְאִין אֶת הַהַלֵּל. אִם גָּמְרוּ 
אוֹתוֹ קוֹדֶם שֶׁיַּקְרִיבוּ כֻלָּם, שׁוֹנִים אוֹתוֹ, 
וְאִם שָׁנוּ יְשַׁלֵּשׁוּ. עַל כָּל קְרִיאָה תּוֹקְעִין 
שָׁלֹשׁ תְּקִיעוֹת: תְּקִיעָה תְּרוּעָה תְּקִיעָה. 
גָּמְרוּ לְהַקְרִיב, פּוֹתְחִין הָעֲזָרָה. יָצְאָה כַּת 
רִאשׁוֹנָה, נִכְנְסָה כַּת שְׁנִיָּה, נוֹעֲלִין דַּלְתוֹת 
הָעֲזָרָה. גָּמְרוּ, פּוֹתְחִין, יָצְאָה כַּת שְׁנִיָּה, 
נִכְנְסָה כַּת שְׁלִישִׁית, וּמַעֲשֵׂה כֻלָּן שָׁוִין. 
וְאַחַר שֶׁיָּצְאוּ כֻלָּן רוֹחֲצִין הָעֲזָרָה, וַאֲפִילוּ 
בְּשַׁבָּת, מִפְּנֵי לִכְלוּךְ הַדָּם שֶׁהָיָה בָהּ. וְכֵיצַד 
הָיְתָה הָרְחִיצָה? אַמַּת הַמַּיִם הָיְתָה עוֹבֶרֶת 
בָּעֲזָרָה, וְהָיָה לָהּ מָקוֹם לָצֵאת מִמֶּנָּה, 
וּכְשֶׁרוֹצִין לְהָדִיחַ אֶת הָרִצְפָּה, סוֹתְמִין 
מְקוֹם יְצִיאָתָהּ, וְהִיא מִתְמַלֵּאת עַל כָּל 
גְּדוֹתֶיהָ מִפֹּה וּמִפֹּה, עַד שֶׁהַמַּיִם עוֹלִים 
וְצָפִים מִכָּאן וּמִכָּאן, וּמְקַבֵּץ אֵלֶיהָ כָּל דָּם 
וְכָל לִכְלוּךְ שֶׁהָיָה בָּעֲזָרָה. וְאַחַר כָּךְ פּוֹתְחִין 
מְקוֹם יְצִיאָתָהּ, וְהַכֹּל יוֹצֵא עַד שֶׁנִּשְׁאָר 
הָרִצְפָּה מְנֻקָּה וּמְשֻׁפָּה. זֶהוּ כְּבוֹד הַבַּיִת. 
וְאִם הַפֶּסַח נִמְצָא טְרֵפָה, לֹא עָלָה לוֹ עַד 
שֶׁמֵּבִיא אַחֵר: 
For most of us, it’s difficult to visualize ourselves involved in bringing this offering. 
But then, it’s also difficult to imagine the dramatic shift in global events that must 
occur for the messianic times of peace and wisdom to dawn upon the world.
Yet, it could all happen overnight. And once that occurs and we experience the 
spiritual high of entering the Temple courtyard, then everything we have just 
read will make perfect sense.
The slaughtering, the sprinkling of its blood, the cleansing of 
its bowels, and the burning of its fat override the Shabbat. But 
anything else done with it does not. 
Likewise, if the fourteenth of Nissan occurs on Shabbat, the 
Pesach offerings can’t be carried home. Instead, one group 
remains with their Pesach offerings on the Temple mount 
outside the Temple courtyard, the second group sits in the chel 
(an intermediate area just outside the Temple court), and the 
third stands in its place in the Temple courtyard. They wait 
there until after nightfall, when everyone goes to their places 
and roasts their Pesach offering. 
The Pesach offering was slaughtered in three groups, each 
consisting of no less than thirty men. 
The first group entered, filling the Temple court, and they 
closed the doors. 
While they were slaughtering the offerings and bringing their 
parts onto the altar, they (principally the Levi’im) recited 
the Hallel. If they finished Hallel before all had made their 
offerings, they repeated it, and if the people were still not done, 
they recited it a third time. 
Each time Hallel was recited, the kohanim sounded three blasts 
of the trumpet: tekiah, teruah, tekiah. 
When all the offerings were done, they opened the doors of the 
Temple court. The first group left, the second entered, and they 
closed the doors of the Temple court. 
When that group finished, they opened the doors again so that 
the second group left and the third entered. 
The procedure with each group was the same. 
Then, after all three groups left, they washed the Temple 
court—even on Shabbat—of the mess of blood. 
How was the washing done? 
A stream of water passed through the Temple court. It had an 
outlet from the court. When they wished to wash the floor, they 
shut that outlet and the stream overflowed its sides, until the 
water rose and flooded the floor all around and gathered all 
the blood and refuse of the court. They then opened the outlet, 
everything flowed out, and the floor was completely clean. This 
was all to keep the honor of the Temple. 
If the Pesach offering you bring is found to be unkosher, you 
haven’t fulfilled your obligation until you bring another one.

=== Page 17 ===

16
Matzah
The Edible Mitzvah
M
atzah is more than a food, it’s the way we relive the Exodus. 
It’s also the only Biblical mitzvah we have today that we ac‑
tually eat and digest. According to Kabbalah, the matzah you eat 
on the first night of Passover strengthens the faith of the soul, and 
matzah eaten on the second night heals both body and soul. So 
make sure you get the real thing because not all matzah is created 
equal. There’s…
YEAR-ROUND MATZAH  
Looks like matzah, tastes like matzah, and has 
the same ingredients as matzah—but it wasn’t 
made for Passover, and so no one made sure 
that it did not become chametz, which is for ‑
bidden on Passover. 
Not kosher for Passover under any conditions.
“RICH” MATZAH  
Matzah made with fruit juice, eggs, or some 
other extra ingredients. 
This matzah shouldn’t be used for the Seder.
If certified kosher for Passover, the Ashke ‑
nazic custom is that it may be used after the 
Seder, during the rest of Passover, only by the 
ill, or those who (for health reasons) simply 
cannot stomach plain matzah. The Sephardic 
custom is varied.
 Read more about this at Chabad.org/1163475.
MACHINE-MADE SHMURAH  
MATZAH  
Matzah that was carefully guarded from all 
moisture from the moment it was harvested 
all the way until it reached your Seder table. 
Almost the ultimate matzah, but not ideal for 
the Seder.

=== Page 18 ===

SEDER PREPARATIONS
17
HANDMADE SHMURAH MATZAH  
For the Seder, you want matzah that was made 
specifically for the mitzvah of eating matzah 
at the Seder—and we haven’t yet invented 
machines that can have that in mind. So the 
ultimate matzah is made by hand in a bakery 
where everyone yells out “For the sake of the  
 
 
mitzvah of matzah!” before kneading, rolling, 
or baking the dough. 
Recently, handmade shmurah matzah has be‑
come available through several major grocery 
outlets, as well as online. Your local Chabad 
Center will likely also have some.
 Go to Chabad.org/265986 for more purchase 
options
.
Get the Details
• The only time you ha ve to eat matzah is on the two Seder nights (in Israel, just the first night).
• For those f
olks with wheat allergies, gluten intolerance or celiac disease, read  
Chabad.org/1814200.
• Eating matzah on the da
y before Passover undermines the whole story. So that’s a no‑no 
e
ven for children, as long as they are old enough to have some idea of what’s going on. Many 
refrain from eating matzah an entire month before Passover.

=== Page 19 ===

18
Pre-Passover Shopping List
 ☐ Lots of kosher for Passover food.
 For tons of kosher for Passover recipes, go to Chabad.org/PassoverRecipes.
 ☐ Lots of wine and/or grape juice.
 ☐ Lot
s of kosher for Passover matzah. (See the Matzah section above.)
 ☐ Candles f
or two nights (make that three nights, if Passover starts on 
Saturday night).
 ☐ 48‑hour candle
, so you can light your Yom Tov candles on the second 
night. *
 ☐ Cook
ed or broiled chicken neck for the Seder plate. (See Zeroa on facing 
page.)
 ☐ Hard‑boiled eggs f
or the Seder plate.
 ☐ Ra
w horseradish (enough for everyone).
 ☐ Lot
s of Romaine lettuce.
 ☐ Apples, pears and w
alnuts for charoset.
 ☐ Veg
etable (like raw onion, celery, parsley, baby carrots or cooked potato…) 
for dipping.
 ☐ Big plates for Seder plates
.
 ☐ Matzah c
overs. You can purchase elegant triple‑deck
er ones. 
 ☐ Cups or glasses for e
veryone, holding at least three ounces.
 ☐ A bowl
, preferably a little broken, for pouring the wine into from your 
cups.
 ☐ Pur
chase or print out copies of this Haggadah.
* Since you can’t light fire on Shabbat or Yom Tov, you’ll need to light a candle that will last more than 25 hours 
befor
e sunset on the first night of the holiday. Then, on the second night, you can use its flame to light the Yom 
Tov candles. (Although you can’t transfer a flame on Shabbat, on Yom Tov it’s permissible.)
 W
hen Passover starts on Saturday night, you’ll need to light a 72‑hour candle on F
riday before sundown. Then, 
use its flame to light the candles on Saturday and Sunday nights.

=== Page 20 ===

SEDER PREPARATIONS
19
What You’ll Need for the Seder 
T
he centerpiece of the Seder table is the plate 
over which the Haggadah is said. There are 
different ways to organize this Seder plate, the 
setup offered on page 21 is according to Rabbi 
Isaac Luria (a.k.a. the Arizal). 
We’re all going to drink four cups of wine, and 
best if you drink all, or at least most, of your cup 
each time. So some people might want a smaller 
cup—but don’t go any smaller than three ounces. 
And make sure to have lots of wine ready. (If they 
really don’t like wine, you can provide grape juice, 
but it’s a good idea to add a little wine to the mix 
if they’re okay with that.)
Of course, the star of the show is the matzah. So 
use the real thing—get round, hand ‑bak
ed shmu‑
rah matzah. You’ll need to pile up three of them, 
with a napkin or cloth between each one. Many 
keep them all inside a special covering. 
Make sure you have enough matzah for everyone 
to eat. At the very least, half a handmade shmurah 
matzah per person, or one whole machine ‑made 
mat
zah. Better to double that, or more. 
It’s best to eat your final matzah (the Afikoman) 
on the first night before midnight. Midnight is 
not necessarily 12 AM. During daylight savings 
time, it’s more like 1 AM—give or take according 
to your longitude. 
So it’s a good idea to look up the precise time for 
midnight in your location at:
 Chabad.org/PassoverTimes
On page 21, you’ll see how to set the Seder 
plate. Make sure you have enough of everything 
that’s there, so that everyone will have enough to 
partake.
You will need a Zeroa, literally, the front leg of 
a sheep or goat. Since that probably won’t fit on 
the Seder plate, any piece of meat will do. Chabad 
custom is to use a broiled chicken neck.
You also need a Baytza, that’s a hard‑boiled egg.
For Maror/Chazeret, the bitter vegetable, 
that’s 1.22 ounces (34 grams) per person, for two 
servings each. Chabad custom is to use romaine 
lettuce or horseradish or a combo of both. Horse‑
radish is used only if it’s unadulterated—not 
pickled or sweetened. Which means you might 
have to purchase a root and grind it yourself (a 
hands‑on bitter labor e
xperience!).
Then there’s the Charoset, mushy sweet stuff   
usually made of crushed apple, pear, walnuts and 
wine.
 Find plenty of Char oset recipes at Chabad.org/
Charoset.
You’ll also need to prepare a dippable vegetable 
for Karpas, such as parsley (flat ‑leaf parsle y 
should be checked for bugs), celery, or carrot 
sticks. Chabad custom is to use a raw onion or 
cooked potato. You’ll need a bowl of saltwater, 
as well, to dip this into. (If the Seder is on Friday 
night, prepare your saltwater before Shabbat.)
There’s also a pillow at everyone’s chair, since 
we’re celebrating freedom, and free people have 
a right to be comfortable. We’ll also use our pil‑
low throughout the Seder when the instructions 
call for us to lean while drinking or eating.
For the meal, many communities have a custom 
not to eat roast meat. And talking about meals, 
it’s a good idea to warn your guests that you won’t 
be starting the meal for a while—that way they 
won’t arrive starving hungry.
Of course, the most important thing you’ll need 
for the Seder are people who can say, “If God 
hadn’t taken our ancestors out of Egypt, we and 
our children and our grandchildren would still be 
slaves.” 
In other words, you need people who left Egypt 
almost three and a half thousand years ago. You 
need Jews. Get as many as you can.

=== Page 21 ===

20
Candle Lighting
Before starting the Seder, all women and girls light candles and say a blessing. Married women generally light 
two candles. Many women light one candle for each child as well. Young girls should light and say a blessing 
before their mothers so that their mothers can assist them.
If it's Friday night, light the candles at least 18 minutes before sunset. Once the sun has set, it's Shabbat, and 
handling fire is forbidden. For the same reason, if it's Saturday night, don't light candles until it's dark and 
Shabbat is over.
On Yom Tov, unlike Shabbat, you can transfer fire—but you can’t make a new fire. So, in order to light candles 
on Yom Tov, you will need to have another flame lit before the festival that will last until the second night. (When 
Passover begins on Saturday night, you’ll need to keep a flame burning from Friday pre-sunset until Sunday 
night.)
On the first night, if it’s not Shabbat, give at least a few coins to charity before lighting candles. But once the sun 
has set and it's Yom Tov or Shabbat, handling money is forbidden
Light the candle(s). Now draw your hands over the flames and towards yourself 
to cover your eyes. Then recite the following two blessings: 
On Friday night, add the words in shaded parentheses.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, 
תָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ  אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ בְּמִצְוֹ 
לְהַדְלִיק נֵר שֶׁל (שַׁבָּת וְשֶׁל) יוֹם טוֹב: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of 
the universe, who has made us holy with 
His mitzvahs, and commanded us to light 
the candles of (Shabbat and of) Yom Tov.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-
lahm ah-sher ki-deh-shah-noo beh-mitz-voh-tahv veh-tzee-vah-noo 
leh-hahd-lik nayr shehl (shah-baht veh-shehl)  yohm tohv.
בָּרוּךְ 
 אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ 
וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לִזְמַן הַזֶּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King 
of the universe, who has granted us life, 
sustained us, and gotten us all the way to 
this point in time!
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm sheh-heh-
kheh-yah-noo veh-kee-yeh-mah-noo veh-hig-ee-ah-noo liz-mahn hah-zeh.

=== Page 22 ===

THE SEDER
21
How to Set Up the Seder Plate
The Seder Plate
2. BAYTZA: 
Hard‑boiled egg
.
4. CHAROSET:
Mushy, sweet stuff. 
Usually made of 
crushed apple, pear, 
walnuts and wine. 
6. CHAZERET:  
More bitter vegetable. Often romaine lettuce 
or horseradish or a combo of both.
 1. ZEROA:  
Literally, the front leg of a sheep 
or goat. Since that probably 
won’t fit, any piece of 
meat will do. Chabad 
custom is to use a 
chicken neck.
MATZAH:  
We place 
three 
matzot 
on a  
plate.
First arrange three whole matzahs on a plate, one on top of the other, with a cloth or napkin 
between each one. Then, on the cloth or plate above all the matzahs, place these items*:
Start with the Zeroa (#1) on the top right, then place the Baytza (#2) on the top left, then the 
Maror (#3) in the middle. The same with the next three: Right, left, middle.
12
3
45
6
3. MAROR:  
Bitter vegetable, 
usually 
romaine lettuce 
or horseradish, 
or a combo of 
the two.
5. KARPAS:  
Dippable veggy.
* Chabad custom is to keep all liquids 
fr
om contacting the matzahs. 
 I
f you’ve got children around (or ram‑
bunctious guests), using giant Ziploc™ 
or other plastic bags f
or the Matzah 
might be a good idea.

=== Page 23 ===

22
The Passover Seder
Tonight’s Program 
In many homes, this is sung before Kiddush: 
 Someone out loud or everyone: 
Transliteration Hebrew Rap Version 
Kadaysh
קַדֵּשׁ Kiddush on wine,
Urchatzוּרְחַץ wash hands, no brachah.
Karpas כַּרְפַּס Eat a vegetable,
Yachatzיַחַץ break a matzah.
Magid מַגִּיד Tell the story, 
Rachtzaרָחְצָה wash hands with a brachah.
Motziמוֹצִיא Blessing on the matzah,
Matzahמַצָּה blessing on the mitzvah.
Marorמָרוֹר Bitter leaves for eating,
Koraychכּוֹרֵךְ bitter in a wrapping.
Shulchan Oraychשֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵךְ 
Now it’s time for eating. Now 
it’s time for drinking.
TzafunצָפוּןEat the afikoman, 
Bayrachבֵּרַךְ thank God for everything.
Hallelהַלֵּל Praise God for His wonders! 
Nirtzahנִרְצָה He accepts—despite our 
blunders.
While we’re discussing requirements, here are the basics of what we need to get done tonight: 
1. Tell the s
tory of the Exodus, miracles included. 
2. Eat a bitter veg
etable. 
3. Eat matzah—lot
s of it. Well, at the very least, 
half a typical handmade shmurah matzah or a 
whole machine matzah. 
4. Eat a meal. 
5. Drink four cups of k
osher wine at set times in 
the Seder. 
6. Sing songs of praise to God for His w
onders.
…and don’t start any of it until after nightfall, like it says, “You shall tell your child on that night.”

=== Page 24 ===

THE SEDER
23
THE TORAH doesn’t prescribe four cups of wine, but the rabbis did—
and the Torah says we should listen to our sages. But why four cups? 
The clue is in a passage in which God promises Moses that He’s about to 
initiate the rescue operation from Egypt:
So now tell the Jewish People, I’m God and I keep My promises. So I’m 
about to extract you from the hardships of Egypt. I’m about to rescue 
you from laboring for these guys. I’m about to liberate you with an out-
stretched arm and major judgments of these people. And then I’m going 
to marry you as My people, and I will be your God. 
See those four verbs: Extract, Rescue, Liberate, Marry (the actual word‑
ing is “take to Me,” but that’s what those words usually mean—marriage). 
That’s the order of exodus and liberation for the Jewish People. It’s also 
the four stages for any person who wants to get out of a rut and rise 
higher. 
First you need to extract yourself out of the lousy place you fell into—
just get out of there. Then you need to work on rescuing yourself from 
its influence and power over you. 
Next comes real freedom and liberation by immersing yourself in Torah 
wisdom, mitzvahs and good deeds. And the ultimate destiny of all of 
Torah is oneness with the one God, like a marriage. 
So we celebrate and experience each of those vital stages of liberation 
by drinking each of these four cups at the appropriate stage in the Seder. 
Make sure to pour each of them and drink these cups at the right point 
in the Seder, because otherwise they just aren’t the four cups the sages 
prescribed.2

=== Page 25 ===

24
JUST LIKE OUR ancestors had to first leave Egypt before they could get 
the Torah, we first have to leave behind the busy, buzzing hullabaloo of 
the world so we can enter a timeless time. A space where all of us, our 
great‑grandparent
s, our ancestors who left Egypt and every last Jew that 
lives, has lived or will live, all live all at once, as a single person. 
How are we going to enter that space? 
With a full cup of wine. 
Wine is tonight’s representative of freedom, so freely fill your cup to the 
brim. 
On other nights, one person makes Kiddush and everyone else gets a sip. Tonight is 
different. Everyone gets their own cup, and everyone drinks it down. Because this is 
cup #1 of tonight’s obligatory four cups.
Make sure each cup holds at least three ounces (86 ml).
At the end of Kiddush, sit down, lean to your left, and drink the whole cup. If that’s too 
much, then most of the cup. Well, at least enough wine to fill one cheek. For most of 
us, that’s about one and a half ounces (45 ml).
Kadesh
קַדֵּשׁ 
Kiddush on Wine

=== Page 26 ===

KADESH
25
Kiddush when the Seder is not on a Friday or Saturday night:
You’ll find the Kiddush for those days on the next pages.
אַתְקִינוּ סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא עִלָּאָה, דָּא הִיא 
סְעוּדָתָא דְּקוּדְשָׁא בְּרִיךְ הוּא וּשְׁכִינְתֵּיהּ: 
PREPARE the feast of the supernal King! This is the feast 
of the Holy One, may He be blessed, and His Shechinah.
 Make sure it’s after nightfall. Everyone stands up, their full cup in hand, and says:
 Someone out loud or everyone
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
Attention Everybody! 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine. 
If you want to say that first blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר בָּנוּ 
מִכָּל עָם, וְרוֹמְמָנוּ מִכָּל לָשׁוֹן, וְקִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו. וַתִּתֶּן לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּאַהֲבָה  בְּמִצְוֹ 
וּזְמַנִּים לְשָׂשׂוֹן, 
מוֹעֲדִים לְשִׂמְחָה, חַגִּים 
אֶת יוֹם חַג הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה, וְאֶת יוֹם טוֹב 
מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, זְמַן חֵרוּתֵנוּ, מִקְרָא 
קֹדֶשׁ, זֵכֶר לִיצִיאַת מִצְרָיִם. כִּי בָנוּ 
בָחַרְתָּ וְאוֹתָנוּ קִדַּשְׁתָּ מִכָּל הָעַמִּים, 
וּמוֹעֲדֵי קָדְשֶׁךָ בְּשִׂמְחָה וּבְשָׂשׂוֹן 
הִנְחַלְתָּנוּ: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, מְקַדֵּשׁ 
יִשְׂרָאֵל וְהַזְּמַנִּים: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has chosen us from among all 
people, and raised us above all tongues, and 
made us holy through His mitzvahs. And You, 
God, our God, have lovingly given us festivals 
for happiness, feasts and festive seasons for 
rejoicing! This day of the matzah feast and this 
day to be called holy, the season of our freedom, 
to be called holy, commemorating the Exodus 
from Egypt.
For You have chosen us and sanctified us from all 
the nations, and You gave us Your holy festivals as 
a heritage in happiness and in joy. 
Blessed are You, God, who sanctifies Israel and 
the festive seasons! 
 Don’t say this if you already said it when lighting the holiday candles: 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ וְקִיְּמָנוּ 
וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לִזְמַן הַזֶּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, 
and gotten us all the way to this point in time! 
If you want to say this blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm 
sheh-heh-kheh-yah-noo veh-kee-yeh-mah-noo veh-hig-ee-ah-noo liz-mahn hah-zeh.
Now sit, lean to the left and drink your first of the four cups of wine!

=== Page 27 ===

26
Kiddush for the Seder on Friday night:
Make sure it’s after nightfall. You’ll find the songs, including Shalom Aleichem, 
that customarily precede Kiddush on Friday night on page 104.
Everyone stands up, their full cup in hand, and says:
 Someone out loud or everyone
יוֹם 
הַשִּׁשִּׁי: וַיְכֻלּוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם 
וְהָאָרֶץ וְכָל צְבָאָם: 
וַיְכַל אֱלֹהִים בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי מְלַאכְתּוֹ 
אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה, וַיִּשְׁבֹּת בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי 
מִכָּל מְלַאכְתּוֹ אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה: 
וַיְבָרֶךְ אֱלֹהִים אֶת יוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי 
וַיְקַדֵּשׁ אֹתוֹ, כִּי בוֹ שָׁבַת מִכָּל מְלַאכְתּוֹ 
אֲשֶׁר בָּרָא אֱלֹהִים לַעֲשׂוֹת: 
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן: 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי 
הַגָּפֶן: 
THE sixth day. 
The heavens and the earth and everything that 
populates them were complete. 
And with the seventh day, God completed His 
work which He had made. So He rested on the 
seventh day from all His work which He had 
made.
Then God blessed the seventh day and made it 
holy, for on it He rested from all His work which 
God had already created to be done.
Attention Everybody!
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine.
If you want to say that first blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר בָּנוּ 
מִכָּל עָם, וְרוֹמְמָנוּ מִכָּל לָשׁוֹן, וְקִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו.  בְּמִצְוֹ 
וַתִּתֶּן לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּאַהֲבָה שַׁבָּתוֹת 
לִמְנוּחָה וּמוֹעֲדִים לְשִׂמְחָה, חַגִּים 
וּזְמַנִּים לְשָׂשׂוֹן, 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has chosen us from among all 
people, raised us above all tongues, and sanctified 
us through His mitzvahs. 
And You, God, our God, have given us in love 
Shabbats for rest and festivals for happiness, 
feasts and festive seasons for rejoicing!

=== Page 28 ===

KADESH
27
אֶת יוֹם הַשַׁבָּת הַזֶּה וְאֶת יוֹם חַג 
הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה, וְאֶת יוֹם טוֹב מִקְרָא 
קֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, זְמַן חֵרוּתֵנוּ, בְּאַהֲבָה 
מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ, זֵכֶר לִיצִיאַת מִצְרָיִם. 
כִּי בָנוּ בָחַרְתָּ וְאוֹתָנוּ קִדַּשְׁתָּ מִכָּל 
הָעַמִּים, וְשַׁבָּת וּמוֹעֲדֵי קָדְשֶׁךָ בְּאַהֲבָה 
וּבְרָצוֹן בְּשִׂמְחָה וּבְשָׂשׂוֹן הִנְחַלְתָּנוּ: 
בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, מְקַדֵּשׁ הַשַּׁבָּת וְיִשְׂרָאֵל 
וְהַזְּמַנִּים: 
This Shabbat day and this day of the Matzot 
feast and this day to be called holy, the season 
of our freedom, in love, to be called holy, 
commemorating the Exodus from Egypt. 
For You have chosen and sanctified us from all the 
nations, and You have given us Your holy Shabbat 
and festivals as a heritage in love and favor, in 
happiness and in joy. 
Blessed are You, God, who sanctifies the Shabbat 
and Israel and the festive seasons!
Don’t say this if you already said it when lighting the holiday candles:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ 
וְקִיְּמָנוּ וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לִזְמַן הַזֶּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, 
and gotten us all the way to this point in time! 
If you want to say this blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm 
sheh-heh-kheh-yah-noo veh-kee-yeh-mah-noo veh-hig-ee-ah-noo liz-mahn hah-zeh.
Now sit, lean to the left and drink your first of four cups of wine!

=== Page 29 ===

28
Kiddush for the Seder on Saturday night:
אַתְקִינוּ סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא עִלָּאָה, דָּא הִיא 
סְעוּדָתָא דְּקוּדְשָׁא בְּרִיךְ הוּא וּשְׁכִינְתֵּיהּ: 
PREPARE the feast of the supernal King! This is the feast 
of the Holy One, may He be blessed, and His Shechinah.
Make sure it’s after nightfall. Everyone stands up, their full cup in hand, and says: 
  Someone out loud or everyone
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי 
הַגָּפֶן: 
Attention Everybody! 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine. 
If you want to say that first blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר בָּחַר בָּנוּ 
מִכָּל עָם, וְרוֹמְמָנוּ מִכָּל לָשׁוֹן, וְקִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו. וַתִּתֶּן לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּאַהֲבָה  בְּמִצְוֹ 
מוֹעֲדִים לְשִׂמְחָה, חַגִּים וּזְמַנִּים 
לְשָׂשׂוֹן, אֶת יוֹם חַג הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה, 
וְאֶת יוֹם טוֹב מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, זְמַן 
צִיאַת 
חֵרוּתֵנוּ, מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ, זֵכֶר לִי 
מִצְרָיִם. כִּי בָנוּ בָחַרְתָּ וְאוֹתָנוּ קִדַּשְׁתָּ 
מִכָּל הָעַמִּים, וּמוֹעֲדֵי קָדְשֶׁךָ בְּשִׂמְחָה 
וּבְשָׂשׂוֹן הִנְחַלְתָּנוּ: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, 
מְקַדֵּשׁ יִשְׂרָאֵל וְהַזְּמַנִּים: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has chosen us from among all 
people, and raised us above all tongues, and made 
us holy through His mitzvahs. 
And You, God, our God, have lovingly given us 
festivals for happiness, feasts and festive seasons 
for rejoicing! This day of the matzah feast and this 
day to be called holy, the season of our freedom, 
to be called holy, commemorating the Exodus 
from Egypt.
For You have chosen us and sanctified us from all 
the nations, and You gave us Your festivals as a 
heritage in happiness and in joy. 
Blessed are You, God, who sanctifies Israel and 
the festive seasons! 
On Saturday night, after Shabbat departs, 
we say Havdalah—to make a distinction between Shabbat and the holiday. 
Glance at the holiday candles, then say this blessing: 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא מְאוֹרֵי 
הָאֵשׁ: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the lights of fire.

=== Page 30 ===

KADESH
Now say the Havdalah blessing: 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, הַמַּבְדִּיל בֵּין 
קֹדֶשׁ לְחוֹל, בֵּין אוֹר לְחֹשֶׁךְ, בֵּין 
יִשְׂרָאֵל לָעַמִּים, בֵּין יוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי 
לְשֵׁשֶׁת יְמֵי הַמַּעֲשֶׂה. בֵּין קְדֻשַּׁת שַׁבָּת 
לִקְדֻשַּׁת יוֹם טוֹב הִבְדַּלְתָּ, וְאֶת יוֹם 
הַשְּׁבִיעִי מִשֵּׁשֶׁת יְמֵי הַמַּעֲשֶׂה קִדַּשְׁתָּ, 
הִבְדַּלְתָּ וְקִדַּשְׁתָּ אֶת עַמְּךָ יִשְׂרָאֵל 
בִּקְדֻשָּׁתֶךָ: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, הַמַּבְדִּיל 
בֵּין קֹדֶשׁ לְקֹדֶשׁ: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who makes the sacred distinct from the 
profane, the light from darkness, Israel from the 
nations, the seventh day from the six workdays. 
You have made the holiness of the Shabbat 
distinct from the holiness of the festival, and You 
have sanctified the seventh day above the six 
workdays. You have set apart Your people Israel 
and made them holy with Your holiness. Blessed 
are You, God, who makes a distinction between 
one kind of holiness and another kind of holiness. 
Don’t say this if you already said it when lighting the holiday candles:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, שֶׁהֶחֱיָנוּ 
וְקִיְּמָנוּ וְהִגִּיעָנוּ לִזְמַן הַזֶּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has granted us life, sustained us, 
and gotten us all the way to this point in time! 
If you want to say this blessing like a pro: 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm sheh-heh-
kheh-yah-noo veh-kee-yeh-mah-noo veh-hig-ee-ah-noo liz-mahn hah-zeh.
Now sit, lean to the left, and drink your first of the four cups of wine!
29

=== Page 31 ===

30
I know, you just sat down. But now you’re going to have to stand up. Why? Because 
now we all have to go to the sink to wash our hands. Your hands are clean already? 
You sterilized them before the meal? Sorry, not good enough. This is a ritual hand-
washing we do before eating anything dipped in water, as a way of remembering the 
rules of purity kept in Temple times. Some bring a basin to the table and let people 
wash there. 
Pour water on each hand three times using a washing cup, covering the entire hand 
each time, from the wrist to the fingertips.  
Usually there’s a blessing recited—but not this time. Make sure no one says the 
blessing by mistake. 
Take a small piece (up to half an ounce, smaller than an olive) of whatever vegetable 
you’re using for Karpas. Dip it into the saltwater. You need to say a blessing over it, 
just like with any other piece of food. But have in mind that this blessing also covers 
the bitter herbs you’ll be eating later on. Now say the blessing: 
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הָאֲדָמָה: 
BLESSED are You, God our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the earth.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh  
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-ah-dah-mah.
 And munch. 
NOW, YOU MAY ASK, why did we do that right after Kiddush? 
We did that so that someone would ask why we did that right after Kiddush. 
After all, it’s not the usual order to begin a meal with a tiny snack. Usually 
you go straight for the bread. To which the answer is: So that someone will 
ask why we did that. 
Because, tonight, people are supposed to ask questions. Especially children. 
And, even if we don’t have answers to all the questions, we can tell the story 
as an answer to a lot of questions.3 Because when a story answers a question, 
it’s a story that’s remembered.
Urchatzוּרְחַץ 
Wash hands, no blessing
Eat a Vegetable
Karpasכַּרְפַּס

=== Page 32 ===

URCHATZ • KARPAS • YACHATZ
31
We need to tell the story with matzah on the table. But it has to be matzah that’s not 
whole. That’s what the Torah calls “bread of suffering,” reminiscent of the suffering of 
Egyptian slavery.4 So:
1. Grasp the middle matzah. 
2. Break it in half (while it’
s still covered).5 
3. Leave the smaller half between the two other matzahs. This is the matzah over 
which the Haggadah is recited. (The other two matzahs ar
e there because we 
always use two whole loaves at Shabbat and holiday meals.)6 
4. The larger piece is called the Afikoman (which basically means “dessert”). Keep 
it somewher
e safe. You’ll need it at the end of the meal.
• Many Ashkenazic Jews have the custom of hiding the Afikoman. Later, when the 
kids ar
e restless, you can offer them a reward for finding it. Others do the reverse: 
The kids hide it and the adults have to find it. 
• An ancient custom of many Middle-Eastern Jews: W
rap the pieces in napkins, 
then in a scarf. Then wrap the scarf over the shoulders of the children, so that the 
matzah is under their arms. Tell them that they are the Children of Israel, carrying 
the matzah out of Egypt. 
Here’s a fun idea. Ask everyone to vote on which piece is bigger and which piece is smaller.
THE CUSTOM of the Rebbe Rashab, Rabbi Sholom DovBer Schneersohn 
(1860–1920), the fifth Rebbe of Lubavitch, was to break the larger (Afikoman) 
piece into five pieces. That’s very Kabbalistic. You see, God created the world 
with divine speech. But wait: God speaks? He’s not a person with a mouth or 
a larynx. How does He speak?
Well, He brings His thoughts into reality—just like we bring our thoughts 
to other people with our speech. Except that His thoughts actually become 
real. We coordinate our throat, tongue, palate, teeth and lips—five different 
devices—to divide up a simple breath into many different sounds. That’s 
because God designed us to mirror His mode of talking. He uses five basic 
means to divide His divine creative energy into the infinite articulations that 
create everything in the universe.
Our job is to reconnect all things back to their origin, as they are all unit‑
ed within that divine energy, before they were divided up. That’s what we 
accomplish with every mitzvah we do in this world. And that’s reflected in 
breaking the Afikoman into five pieces, hiding them, then bringing them out 
and eating them.7
Yachatzיַחַץ 
Break the Middle Matzah

=== Page 33 ===

32
 Introducing Matzah 
Now it’s time to formally introduce the centerpiece of our celebrations tonight, the humble matzah. So we uncover 
the matzah a little for all to see, and then we all say or sing: 
הֵא 
לַחְמָא עַנְיָא דִּי אֲכָלוּ 
אַבְהָתָנָא בְּאַרְעָא דְמִצְרָיִם. 
כֹּל דִּכְפִין יֵיתֵי וְיֵכוֹל, כֹּל דִצְרִיךְ יֵיתֵי 
וְיִפְסָח. הַשַּׁתָּא הָכָא, לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה 
בְּאַרְעָא דְיִשְׂרָאֵל. הַשַּׁתָּא עַבְדִין, 
לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה בְּנֵי חוֹרִין: 
THIS is the bread of affliction that our ancestors 
ate in the land of Egypt. Whoever is hungry, come 
eat with us! Whoever is needy, come join our 
Seder! This year we’re here; next year in the land 
of Israel! This year we’re slaves; next year we will 
be free!
THIS MAY SEEM A LITTLE BIZARRE. We came to celebrate our freedom, 
and here we are saying that we’re still slaves. So what are we celebrating?
The truth is, the Exodus never really accomplished all of its goals. A lot of 
things never went as planned. And so, eventually we ended back up in exile.
That’s how it goes with top‑down r
elief projects. If you want to make lasting 
change, it’s got to come from within the people.
And that’s precisely what we are planning to do tonight: We’re going to liber‑
ate ourselves from our own private exiles, and thereby facilitate the Exodus 
of the entire world. How? By doing the mitzvahs of the Seder from a place 
deep inside.8
Pour the Second Cup 
Now cover the matzah for the Four Questions. Then everyone refills their cup.
This is the cup over which we tell the Exodus story. 
YOU’RE PROBABLY ASKING, “Why do we cover the matzah? And why pour 
the cup now? Why not wait until we’re going to drink it?” 
Well, it’s because if nothing else got the kids to ask questions until now, for 
sure this will. Look, it worked for you!9
Magidמַגִּיד 
Tell the Story

=== Page 34 ===

MAGID
33
Mah Nishtanah
The Four Questions
IN MANY HOMES, everyone begins this by saying, “Dad/Tatte/Abba, I want 
to ask you four questions.” Even if they don’t have a dad there.
Because the Haggadah is described in the Torah as an answer to a child’s 
question. After all, children get what you’re telling them only when it an‑
swers their question. 
In case the children have no questions, we provide four right here. But really, 
we are all children tonight. We are all reborn, leaving our own Egypt. And 
who do we ask? Dad. Our ultimate Dad.
On the night of Passover, a Jew sits with the Creator of the Universe and 
says, “Dad, I want to ask you a few questions: Why is this night different from 
any other night? Meaning: Why is this darkness different from any other 
darkness? Why did You abandon us to this exile for almost 2,000 years? Why 
all this bitterness?”
And then, as is the responsibility of every parent on the night of Passover, 
the Creator of the Universe must respond.
He must respond that on this night He is going to take each of us by the 
hand and schlep us out of our personal Egypt, and the whole world out of its 
darkness. 
And then we will see that the darkness was all worthwhile, really worth‑
while.10

=== Page 35 ===

34
 Someone out loud (preferably a child):
מַﬣ נִּשְׁתַּנָּה 
הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה מִכָּל הַלֵּילוֹת. 
 שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אֵין אָנוּ מַטְבִּילִין 
 אֲפִילוּ פַּעַם אֶחָת, 
הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה שְׁתֵּי פְעָמִים: 
שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָנוּ אוֹכְלִין חָמֵץ אוֹ 
מַצָּה, הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלּוֹ מַצָּה: 
שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָנוּ אוֹכְלִין שְׁאָר 
יְרָקוֹת, הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה מָרוֹר: 
שֶׁבְּכָל הַלֵּילוֹת אָנוּ אוֹכְלִין בֵּין יוֹשְׁבִין 
וּבֵין מְסֻבִּין, הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה כֻּלָּנוּ מְסֻבִּין: 
I’VE got four questions to ask. 
Basically, I want to know: 
What makes tonight different than every other 
night?
1. On other nights w
e don’t go dipping 
vegetables before we start the meal.11 But 
tonight, we do, so we end up dipping twice! 
One time in saltwater, and once in the 
charoset!
2. On other nights w
e can eat chametz or we can 
eat matzah. Tonight, everything is matzah! 
3. On other nights
, we eat all sorts of vegetables. 
Tonight, we make a big deal out of eating a 
bitter vegetable! 
4. On other nights
, we sit or we lean. Tonight, 
when we drink wine or eat matzah, everyone’s 
leaning!
THE ORDER of the four questions is not the same in every Haggadah. But 
you can’t go wrong with any version. This one is found in the Jerusalem Tal-
mud, in the first printed Haggadah, and in almost all the early authorities. 
And according to Kabbalah, it lines up with the order of the four worlds, be-
ginning with our world and working up through the higher, spiritual worlds.
It also makes a lot of sense, because it follows the actual order of these things 
as they catch a kid’s attention tonight. 
That just goes to show how vital all these little details of the Seder are, even 
the customs that aren’t mentioned in Torah—because it’s those micro-rituals 
that spark the kids’ interest and stay with them for life!12
Nevertheless, it’s not that any other order is wrong. Originally you didn’t have 
to ask specifically these questions. Maybe the kids would come up with other 
questions!13

=== Page 36 ===

MAGID
35
Now everyone can sing together the original Hebrew—even if you don’t know Hebrew: 
 Everyone:
Mah nish-tah-nah hah-lai-lah hah-zeh 
Mee-kohl hah-lay-loht?
Sheh-beh-khohl hah-lay-loht ayn ah-noo maht-bee-leen 
Ah-fee-loo pah-ahm eh-khat, 
Hah-lai-lah hah-zeh 
Sheh-tay peh-ah-meem!
Sheh-beh-khohl hah-lay-loht ah-noo okh-leen 
Kha-maytz o mah-tzah, 
Hah-lai-lah hah-zeh 
Koo-loh mah-tzah!
Sheh-beh-khohl hah-lay-loht ah-noo okh-leen 
Sheh-ahr yeh-rah-koht, 
Hah-lai-lah hah-zeh 
Mah-rohr!
Sheh-beh-khohl hah-lay-loht ah-noo okh-leen 
Bayn yoh-shveen oo-vayn meh-soo-been, 
Hah-lai-lah hah-zeh 
Koo-lah-noo meh-soo-been!

=== Page 37 ===

36
The Answer: Take One
 Now we’re about to start telling the story. The story is supposed to be told over matzah. So we uncover the matzah 
for all to see. The story is about God’s love for us, how He carried us out of the humiliation of soul-crushing slavery 
to bring us close to Him. So we begin:
Uncover the matzah.
 Someone out loud:
עֲבָדִים 
הָיִינוּ לְפַרְעֹה 
בְּמִצְרָיִם, וַיּוֹצִיאֵנוּ 
יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ מִשָּׁם בְּיָד חֲזָקָה וּבִזְרֹעַ 
נְטוּיָה, וְאִלּוּ לֹא הוֹצִיא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ 
הוּא אֶת אֲבוֹתֵינוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, הֲרֵי אָנוּ 
וּבָנֵינוּ וּבְנֵי בָנֵינוּ מְשֻׁעְבָּדִים הָיִינוּ 
לְפַרְעֹה בְּמִצְרָיִם. וַאֲפִילוּ כֻּלָּנוּ חֲכָמִים 
כֻּלָּנוּ נְבוֹנִים כֻּלָּנוּ יוֹדְעִים אֶת הַתּוֹרָה, 
מִצְוָה עָלֵינוּ לְסַפֵּר בִּיצִיאַת מִצְרָיִם, 
וְכָל הַמַּרְבֶּה לְסַפֵּר בִּיצִיאַת מִצְרַיִם 
הֲרֵי זֶה מְשֻׁבָּח: 
WE started off as slaves to the Pharaoh in Egypt. 
Until God liberated us from there with what’s 
called “a strong hand and an outstretched arm”—
basically, a lot of big miracles.
In fact, if He hadn’t taken us out of there, we 
would be slaves, our children would be slaves, 
our grandchildren would be slaves…and so on. 
Nobody would even have thought of the whole 
idea of freedom. 
That’s why we’re telling this story tonight.
Even if we would all be wise and understanding, 
even if we all knew everything that’s written in 
the Torah, it would still be a mitzvah for us to tell 
this story tonight. And the more you tell of this 
story the better.
So if you have anything to add to what we’re going 
to say, or any questions to ask, please speak up.
A lot of people like to sing these words:  Everyone:
Ah-va-deem hah-yee-noo!
Leh-fah-roh beh-mitz-rah-yim!

=== Page 38 ===

MAGID
37
How Five Big Rabbis Spent an Entire Night Doing This 
 Someone out loud:
מַעֲשֶׂה 
בְּרַבִּי אֱלִיעֶזֶר 
וְרַבִּי יְהוֹשֻׁעַ וְרַבִּי 
אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן עֲזַרְיָה וְרַבִּי עֲקִיבָא וְרַבִּי 
טַרְפוֹן, שֶׁהָיוּ מְסֻבִּים בִּבְנֵי בְרַק, וְהָיוּ 
מְסַפְּרִים בִּיצִיאַת מִצְרַיִם כָּל אוֹתוֹ 
הַלַּיְלָה, עַד שֶׁבָּאוּ תַלְמִידֵיהֶם וְאָמְרוּ 
לָהֶם: רַבּוֹתֵינוּ, הִגִּיעַ זְמַן קְרִיאַת 
שְׁמַע שֶׁל שַׁחֲרִית: 
JUST to give an example: There was an instance 
where five great rabbis were sitting at a Seder in 
B’nei Brak the whole night telling the story of the 
liberation from Egypt. Big rabbis: Rabbi Eliezer, 
Rabbi Yehoshua, Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah, Rabbi 
Akiva and Rabbi Tarfon.
They didn’t stop until their students arrived and 
said, “Our teachers! It’s already time to say the 
morning Shema!” (That’s the “Hear O Israel, God 
is our God, God is One” that we say every morning 
and every night.) 
אָמַר 
רַבִּי אֶלְעָזָר בֶּן עֲזַרְיָה: 
הֲרֵי אֲנִי כְּבֶן שִׁבְעִים 
שָׁנָה, וְלֹא זָכִיתִי שֶׁתֵּאָמַר יְצִיאַת 
מִצְרַיִם בַּלֵּילוֹת, עַד שֶׁדְּרָשָׁהּ בֶּן 
זוֹמָא, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: לְמַעַן תִּזְכֹּר אֶת יוֹם 
צֵאתְךָ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם כֹּל יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ. 
יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ הַיָּמִים, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ לְהָבִיא 
הַלֵּילוֹת. וַחֲכָמִים אוֹמְרִים: יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ 
הָעוֹלָם הַזֶּה, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיֶּיךָ לְהָבִיא 
לִימוֹת הַמָּשִׁיחַ: 
WHAT do you think they were discussing? 
Well, for one thing, Rabbi Elazar pointed out 
that he was about seventy years old… well, he 
wasn’t really—he was still a teenager—but he 
miraculously got this distinguished beard so 
that people would respect him when he was 
appointed head of the Supreme Court. So he 
looked seventy. And he had the wisdom of a 
seventy-year-old sage. 
At any rate, Rabbi Elazar had not been able to 
figure out why we mention the Exodus not just 
every day, but also every night of the year.
Everything revolves around these words from the 
Torah: 
“…in order that you should mention the Exodus 
from Egypt all the days of your life.”
So since we did that already in the morning when 
we said the last paragraph of the Shema, why do 
we say that last paragraph again at night?

=== Page 39 ===

38
IT TURNS OUT that the rabbis are 
also debating another important 
point: In the Messianic Era, will 
we still tell the miraculous story 
of how we left Egypt? Ben Zoma 
would tell you, “No way! After 
seeing the entire world enter an 
era of wisdom and peace, we will 
tell that story instead. As for mir‑
acles—we will be ever ‑aw
are of all 
the amazing miracles constantly 
surrounding us!”
But the rest of the rabbis disagree. 
They say that even after all the 
incredible miracles when we leave 
this final exile—way beyond the 
miracles of Egypt—we will still 
make mention of the Exodus from 
Egypt. Because that’s when it all 
began.
As it turns out, that very day Ben Zoma (no, Ben 
wasn’t his first name—that means “son of Zoma”) 
had explained that there’s an extra word here: It 
says “all the days of your life.” There are plenty 
of other things the Torah tells me to remember, 
and it’s self-understood that I have to remember 
it every day without being told so. If you don’t 
remember every day, you’re not remembering, 
you’re forgetting, right? 
So Ben Zoma came up with a simple formula: 
Days of your life = In the daytime, while the 
sun is shining. 
All the days of your life = In the daytime + the 
nighttime. 
What about the rest of the rabbis? It seems they 
didn’t have the same appreciation of Ben Zoma’s 
insight. They provided a different formula: 
Days of your life = The life of this world. 
All the days of your life = The life of this 
world + the life of the world to come (a.k.a. 
the Messianic Era). 
So, according to the rest of the rabbis, Ben Zoma 
has no proof from this verse.

=== Page 40 ===

MAGID
39
The Four Children at the Seder 
Now, before we get to the Exodus story, here’s a few lines similar to a blessing14 before the mitzvah of telling the 
story. The Torah tells us this mitzvah four times, so there are four blessings in here:
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
הַמָּקוֹם, בָּרוּךְ הוּא, 
בָּרוּךְ שֶׁנָּתַן תּוֹרָה 
לְעַמּוֹ יִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּרוּךְ הוּא: 
BLESSED is the One Who Encompasses the 
Entire World,15 blessed be He. Blessed is the One 
who gave Torah to His people, blessed be He.
A lot of people like to sing these words: 
Bah-rookh hah-mah-kom, bah-rookh hoo!
Bah-rookh sheh-nah-tahn toh-rah
Leh-ah-moh yis-rah-ehl—bah-rookh hoo!
ALL OF A SUDDEN we’re referring to God as the One Who Encompasses the 
Entire World. In Hebrew, that’s just one word: Hamakom, The Place. 
Why? Because, say the rabbis, the universe is not His place. Rather, He is the 
place of the universe. Which means that even as He is within time and space 
and all that happens there, He remains beyond it all. 
And that’s why we call Him by that title here:
If God belonged to some particular place, some of your children might be 
closer to Him and others further away. But since He encompasses every‑
thing and everyone, He’s immediately accessible to all of us regardless of 
brains, personality type, or where we find ourselves in life.
The four kids of the Haggadah represent the gamut of human personality. 
And Torah has a particular approach for each one. Now that’s wisdom from 
out of this world, in this world!16
 Someone out loud:
כְּנֶגֶד 
אַרְבָּעָה בָנִים דִּבְּרָה 
תוֹרָה: אֶחָד חָכָם, וְאֶחָד 
רָשָׁע, וְאֶחָד תָּם, וְאֶחָד שֶׁאֵינוֹ יוֹדֵעַ 
לִשְׁאוֹל: 
THE Torah is so concerned that we get this story 
across, it tells four different ways to tell four 
different kinds of kids this story. 
1. One is a bright, inquisitiv
e kind of kid.
2. One is (temporarily17) wicked. 
3. One is simple.
4 And one just doesn’t kno
w how to ask questions.18

=== Page 41 ===

40
You learn by asking questions—so the child with the brightest question comes first:
The Bright One 
 Someone else out loud:
חָכָם 
מַה הוּא אוֹמֵר: מָה 
הָעֵדֹת וְהַחֻקִּים 
וְהַמִּשְׁפָּטִים אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
אֶתְכֶם. וְאַף אַתָּה אֱמוֹר לוֹ כְּהִלְכוֹת 
הַפֶּסַח, אֵין מַפְטִירִין אַחַר הַפֶּסַח 
אֲפִיקוֹמָן: 
WHAT does the bright one say? 
“Explain to me all the symbolism, the rituals 
and the rules that God our God commanded 
you.” So, besides telling him the story and all the 
explanations,19 you also have to tell him all the 
rules of Passover, all the way to the last rule, that 
you don’t eat anything after the Afikoman.
WHAT’S INSIDE this child’s question? Here are some possibilities: 
1. This child is r
eally excited about learning. That’s real wisdom. So you 
teach. 
2. This child doesn’t g
et why we have to do all these rituals. If God is spiri‑
tual, then why don’t we just philosophize and meditate? 
So you explain that God is beyond spiritual. You can’t reach God with 
your mind, but you can be one with God by doing mitzvahs. 
3. This child doesn’t g
et how we could relate to a God who is way beyond 
any spiritual philosophizing or meditating. Why do we try to understand 
anything at all? Just do it! 
So you explain that God wants us to connect to Him with every part of us, 
including our mind and heart. The ultimate point in the Seder is the taste of 
a matzah lingering in your mouth, symbolizing the delicious flavor of know‑
ing what can’t be known.20
The (Temporarily) Wicked One 
 Someone else out loud:
רָשָׁע 
מַה הוּא אוֹמֵר: מָה 
הָעֲבֹדָה הַזֹּאת לָכֶם. 
לָכֶם וְלֹא לוֹ, וּלְפִי שֶׁהוֹצִיא אֶת עַצְמוֹ 
מִן הַכְּלָל, כָּפַר בְּעִקָּר. וְאַף אַתָּה 
הַקְהֵה אֶת שִׁנָּיו וֶאֱמֹר לוֹ: בַּעֲבוּר זֶה 
עָשָׂה יְיָ לִי בְּצֵאתִי מִמִּצְרָיִם, לִי וְלֹא 
לוֹ, אִלּוּ הָיָה שָׁם לֹא הָיָה נִגְאָל: 
AS for the one who is (temporarily) wicked, what 
does he say? “Why do you people do all this?” 
He says “you people,” excluding himself. He’s 
denying the basis of the entire Seder—that we 
are one people. How can you celebrate Passover 
if there’s no Jewish People? So you blunt his 
argument. You quote the verse, “It’s because of 
this that God did all these things for me when I 
left Egypt.” If he’s excluding himself already, he’s 
excluding himself from leaving Egypt. If he had 
been there, he would never have been liberated.

=== Page 42 ===

MAGID
41
OF COURSE, this time around, he’ll come with us. Only if he had been there, 
before the Torah was given, would he never have been liberated.
But now that the Torah has made us into an indivisible whole, nobody will 
be left behind. Whether you’re inspired or not, practicing or rebelling, you 
remain an irreplaceable part of the Jewish People.
And maybe when he hears that, he’ll get how amazing this Torah is—that it 
connects us together no matter what. Maybe that’s why we put him next to 
the bright child—so that he can teach him how precious and valuable he is 
to his people.21
The Simple One 
 Someone else out loud:
תָּם 
מַה הוּא אוֹמֵר: מַה זֹּאת, 
וְאָמַרְתָּ אֵלָיו: בְּחֹזֶק יָד 
הוֹצִיאָנוּ יְיָ מִמִּצְרַיִם מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים: 
WHAT about the simple one? Well, he just sits 
there in total amazement and says, “What is this?” 
So you tell him about all the amazing miracles, 
saying, “With a mighty hand, God took us out of 
Egypt, where we were slaves!” 
THE SIMPLE CHILD may not be too bright, but in a way, he’s more in touch 
with God. 
First of all, because God is simple. When you’re complicated, you end up 
going in circles and you lose the simple point at the center, a.k.a. God. That’s 
something bright people need to learn from simple people.22 
Secondly, because he’s forever in wonder. As soon as you’ve lost wonder, 
you’ve lost touch with truth. 
Which brings us to the next child… 
The Inquisitively Challenged One 
 Someone else out loud:
וְשֶׁאֵינוֹ 
יוֹדֵעַ לִשְׁאוֹל, 
אַתְּ פְּתַח לוֹ, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וְהִגַּדְתָּ לְבִנְךָ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא 
לֵאמֹר: בַּעֲבוּר זֶה עָשָׂה יְיָ לִי בְּצֵאתִי 
מִמִּצְרָיִם: 
AND the one who doesn’t know how to ask 
questions? Well, you’ll have to open the 
conversation for him. Tell him things that will 
get him to ask. Tell him, “God did all these things 
for me in Egypt so that I would do all this stuff.” 
Including stuff like trying to get you to ask 
questions.

=== Page 43 ===

42
IF YOU’RE NOT inquisitively challenged, you’re probably asking: Where 
does the Torah speak about four children? 
Well, it speaks about them by bringing up their questions. For three of them, 
that is. In one of the four instances of parent‑to‑child transmission of this 
s
tory, the question is absent. That’s child #4—the child that doesn’t ask. 
Perhaps that’s because he’s kind of absent himself. Sure, he’s sitting there 
at the Seder. He goes through all the motions. He does exactly what he’s 
supposed to do. But if he were really there, in mind, heart and soul, he would 
have questions. 
Your job then is to open him up, get him engaged. Get him to ask questions. 
Otherwise, how will he learn?23
The Question of the Inquisitively Challenged Child24
 Someone else out loud:
יָכוֹל 
מֵרֹאשׁ חֹדֶשׁ, תַּלְמוּד 
לוֹמַר: בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא. אִי 
בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא, יָכוֹל מִבְּעוֹד יוֹם, תַּלְמוּד 
לוֹמַר: בַּעֲבוּר זֶה, בַּעֲבוּר זֶה לֹא 
אָמַרְתִּי אֶלָּא בְּשָׁעָה שֶׁיֵּשׁ מַצָּה וּמָרוֹר 
מֻנָּחִים לְפָנֶיךָ: 
Two Voices:
You: Hold on, maybe we were supposed to do this 
Seder on Rosh Chodesh—15 days ago, on the first 
day of the month! 
Kid: Umm. Why then? 
You: Because that’s when God told Moses about 
the mitzvah of Passover. 
Kid: Okay, so we messed up. 
You: Nope, it says on that day. 
Kid: Okay, so let’s get on. What do we say next? 
You: Not so simple. Because then we should be 
doing it during the day. Now it’s night already. 
Kid: So it’s over. Let’s eat. 
You: Not so fast. You see, it says “for the sake of 
this stuff.” Meaning this matzah and bitter herbs 
that we eat on the night of Passover. So we have 
to wait until we’re supposed to eat that stuff—and 
that’s tonight. 
Kid: But why do we have to tell a story to food? 
 Someone out loud:
See? It worked!

=== Page 44 ===

MAGID
43
YOU MAY HAVE HEARD of the fifth child.
That’s the one who didn’t turn up tonight. Probably not his fault. He might 
not even know it’s Passover. If he would, and if he knew how much we would 
like to see him, good chance he would be real eager to come.
This Seder is for the fifth child as well. Because if we’re inspired enough by 
this Seder, we’ll make sure that fifth child will be at the next one.25
The Answer: Take Two 
AS WITH MOST THINGS JEWISH, there’s more than one opinion on how to 
tell the story of the Exodus. 
Everyone agrees that we start with what was wrong and end with what went 
right. One opinion is that what was wrong was that we were slaves in Egypt. 
The other opinion is that it started long before that, when we were idolaters. 
In Torah, two opinions can both be true, so we have two beginnings of the 
story.
 Someone out loud:
מִתְּחִלָּה 
עוֹבְדֵי עֲבוֹדָה 
זָרָה הָיוּ 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, וְעַכְשָׁו קֵרְבָנוּ הַמָּקוֹם 
לַעֲבֹדָתוֹ, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיֹּאמֶר יְהוֹשֻׁעַ אֶל 
כָּל הָעָם, כֹּה אָמַר יְיָ אֱלֹהֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל: 
בְּעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר יָשְׁבוּ אֲבוֹתֵיכֶם מֵעוֹלָם, 
תֶּרַח אֲבִי אַבְרָהָם וַאֲבִי נָחוֹר, וַיַּעַבְדוּ 
אֱלֹהִים אֲחֵרִים: 
וָאֶקַּח 
אֶת אֲבִיכֶם אֶת 
אַבְרָהָם מֵעֵבֶר הַנָּהָר, 
וָאוֹלֵךְ אֹתוֹ בְּכָל אֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן, וָאַרְבֶּה 
אֶת זַרְעוֹ וָאֶתֶּן לוֹ אֶת יִצְחָק: וָאֶתֵּן 
לְיִצְחָק אֶת יַעֲקֹב וְאֶת עֵשָׂו, וָאֶתֵּן 
לְעֵשָׂו אֶת הַר שֵׂעִיר לָרֶשֶׁת אוֹתוֹ, 
וְיַעֲקֹב וּבָנָיו יָרְדוּ מִצְרָיִם: 
Now, here’s an embarrassing and shameful fact, 
that we’re going to have to admit: 
ORIGINALLY, our ancestors were idolaters. But 
now, the One Who Encompasses Everything has 
brought us into a great deal, working exclusively 
for Him. 
That’s what Joshua said to all the people: 
So says God, the God of Israel, “Your fathers lived 
on the other side of the river for a long time. 
There was Terach, the father of Abraham and 
Nahor. And they served other gods. 
“SO I took your father Abraham from the other 
side of the river and I walked him through 
the whole land of Canaan. I gave him lots of 
descendants. I gave him Isaac. To Isaac I gave 
Jacob and Esau. To Esau, I gave Mount Seir to take 
over. Jacob and his children went down  
to Egypt.”

=== Page 45 ===

44
ABRAHAM was the first iconoclast—meaning, literally, an idol ‑smasher. 
Abraham sa
w that demagogues were abusing the natural awe and wonder 
of the human soul to establish their power over society. All on his own, he 
rediscovered a forgotten truth—that there’s really only one source of all 
power and existence, and He has nothing to do with what these charlatans 
were preaching. 
Most importantly, Abraham had a conviction that this All‑P
owerful Being is 
just, and cares about what’s going on down here with us little creatures. And 
so, he stood up for justice and compassion. 
And that’s how the Jewish People got started.26
The Promise of Protection
 Someone out loud:
בָּרוּךְ 
שׁוֹמֵר הַבְטָחָתוֹ 
לְיִשְׂרָאֵל, בָּרוּךְ הוּא, 
שֶׁהַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא חִשֵּׁב אֶת הַקֵּץ 
לַעֲשׂוֹת כְּמָה שֶׁאָמַר לְאַבְרָהָם אָבִינוּ 
בִּבְרִית בֵּין הַבְּתָרִים, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיֹּאמֶר 
לְאַבְרָם: יָדֹעַ תֵּדַע כִּי גֵר יִהְיֶה זַרְעֲךָ 
בְּאֶרֶץ לֹא לָהֶם, וַעֲבָדוּם וְעִנּוּ אֹתָם, 
אַרְבַּע מֵאוֹת שָׁנָה: וְגַם אֶת הַגּוֹי אֲשֶׁר 
יַעֲבֹדוּ דָּן אָנֹכִי, וְאַחֲרֵי כֵן יֵצְאוּ בִּרְכֻשׁ 
גָּדוֹל: 
BLESSED is the One who keeps His promise to 
Israel, blessed be He! 
You see, the Holy One Blessed Be He cut down 
our exile by calculating 400 years from the birth 
of Isaac. 
Here’s what He said to our father Abraham in the 
Covenant Between the Parts:
“Know that your children are going to be 
strangers in a land that does not belong to them 
for four hundred years. They are going to be 
enslaved and oppressed. Also know that I won’t 
let off the hook the nation that enslaves them. 
And after that, they’ll get out of there with a lot of 
wealth.”
Now cover the matzah, lift up your cups, and chant: 
 Everyone:
וְהִיא 
שֶׁעָמְדָה לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ וְלָנוּ, 
שֶׁלֹּא אֶחָד בִּלְבַד עָמַד 
עָלֵינוּ לְכַלּוֹתֵנוּ אֶלָּא שֶׁבְּכָל דּוֹר וָדוֹר 
עוֹמְדִים עָלֵינוּ לְכַלּוֹתֵנוּ, וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא מַצִּילֵנוּ מִיָּדָם: 
IT’S this promise that has stood for our ancestors 
and for us. 
Because not just one nation alone has arisen 
against us to wipe us out. In every generation, 
there are those who stand against us to wipe us 
out. 
And each time, the Holy One, blessed be He, saves 
us from their hand.

=== Page 46 ===

MAGID
45
Veh-hee sheh-ahm-dah lah-ah-voh-tay-noo veh-lah-noo
Sheh-loh eh-khahd bil-vahd ah-mahd ah-lay-noo leh-kha-loh-tay-noo
Eh-lah sheh-beh-khohl dohr vah-dohr ohm-deem ah-lay-noo leh-kha-loh-tay-noo
Veh-hah-kah-dohsh bah-rookh hoo mah-tzee-lay-noo mee-yah-dahm.
Put down the cup and uncover the matzah again. 
PEOPLE ARE LOOKING for miracles. Why did they happen back then and 
not today? 
But if you know a little history, you’ll realize that the fact that you are here 
today and you know you are a Jew is the greatest of miracles and the stron‑
gest evidence of our covenant with God.27 Just because we don’t notice the 
miracles doesn’t make them any less miraculous.
Divine Protection at Work 
 Someone out loud:
צֵא 
וּלְמַד מַה בִּקֵּשׁ לָבָן הָאֲרַמִּי 
לַעֲשׂוֹת לְיַעֲקֹב אָבִינוּ, 
שֶׁפַּרְעֹה לֹא גָזַר אֶלָּא עַל הַזְּכָרִים, 
וְלָבָן בִּקֵּשׁ לַעֲקוֹר אֶת הַכֹּל, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: אֲרַמִּי אֹבֵד אָבִי, וַיֵּרֶד 
מִצְרַיְמָה וַיָּגָר שָׁם בִּמְתֵי מְעָט, וַיְהִי 
שָׁם לְגוֹי גָּדוֹל עָצוּם וָרָב: 
Let’s step out of the Exodus story for a minute to 
see God’s protection at work with the prototype 
Jew, Jacob. Then we’ll see how the same thing 
unfolds in Egypt.
TAKE a look at what Laban the Aramean 
attempted to do to Jacob, father of all us Jews. 
After all, Pharaoh only made a decree against 
baby boys, but Laban was out to uproot the entire 
nation.
That was when Jacob picked up his entire family to 
get out of the clutches of Laban, his corrupt father-
in-law. 
Laban got wind of this and chased after him. But 
God intervened, appearing to Laban in a dream, 
warning him not to hurt Jacob.28
Like it says: 
An Aramean was out to annihilate my father. 
Eventually, he went down to Egypt. He was just 
visiting there with very few people, but he ended 
up becoming a mighty people there, powerful and 
populous.29

=== Page 47 ===

46
Unpacking a Packed Passage, Part 1 
NOW we’ll start telling the story of our descent to Egypt, our enslavement, 
and our liberation from there. We’ll do that by taking four terse lines of To‑
rah that pack in the entire story, unpacking them one by one for the details 
that appear elsewhere in Torah or the Prophets. As we do that, everybody 
should add in more details that they’ve learned, or implications that they see 
in there.
The verses we’ll use are those we would say when we brought our first fruits 
to the Temple. We gave a basket of produce to a Kohen and recited these 
verses to tell the story of the Exodus and to thank God for the Promised 
Land. Since everyone knew them by heart, they served as the everyman’s 
Jewish history in a nutshell. So they’re packed tight with meaning.30 
To make things clearer, here’s the entire passage that we’re going to unpack: 
1. An Aramean was out to annihilate m
y father. Eventually, he went down 
to Egypt. He was just visiting, bringing only a few people, but ended up 
becoming a mighty people there, powerful and populous. (Deut. 26:5)
2. The Egyptians tr eated us badly and they made us suffer, and they assigned us 
hard work. (Deut. 26:6)
3. And we cried out to God, the God of our fathers, and God heard our voice 
and sa
w our suffering, our labor and our oppression. (Deut. 26:7)
4. And God took us out of Egypt with a s
trong hand and with an out‑
stretched arm, with a huge display, with signs and with wonders. (Deut. 
26:8)
 Someone out loud:
וַיֵּרֶד מִצְרַיְמָה, אָנוּס עַל פִּי הַדִּבּוּר 
וַיָּגָר שָׁם, מְלַמֵּד שֶׁלֹא יָרַד יַעֲקֹב 
אָבִינוּ לְהִשְׁתַּקֵּעַ בְּמִצְרַיִם אֶלָּא לָגוּר 
שָׁם, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיֹּאמְרוּ אֶל פַּרְעֹה לָגוּר 
בָּאָרֶץ בָּאנוּ, כִּי אֵין מִרְעֶה לַצֹּאן אֲשֶׁר 
לַעֲבָדֶיךָ, כִּי כָבֵד הָרָעָב בְּאֶרֶץ כְּנָעַן, 
 וְעַתָּה יֵשְׁבוּ נָא עֲבָדֶיךָ 
בְּאֶרֶץ גֹּשֶׁן: 
Let’s unpack the verse we just quoted: 
He went down to Egypt.
That’s telling us that Jacob went down to 
Egypt by divine decree. He had no choice. 
It was decided beforehand that this had to 
happen.
He was just visiting there…
That means Jacob never went there to stay, 
just for a short visit. Take a look at what his 
sons said to Pharaoh:
“We’ve just come for a short stay in the land. 
You see, there’s no pasture left for us in 
Canaan because the famine is so bad there. 
So now could you please let your servants 
[i.e., Jacob & sons] sit it out for a while in the 
Goshen territory?”

=== Page 48 ===

MAGID
47
בִּמְתֵי מְעָט, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: בְּשִׁבְעִים 
נֶפֶשׁ יָרְדוּ אֲבֹתֶיךָ מִצְרָיְמָה, וְעַתָּה 
שָׂמְךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ כְּכוֹכְבֵי הַשָּׁמַיִם לָרֹב: 
וַיְהִי שָׁם לְגוֹי, מְלַמֵּד שֶׁהָיוּ יִשְׂרָאֵל 
מְצֻיָּנִים שָׁם: 
גָּדוֹל עָצוּם, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וּבְנֵי 
יִשְׂרָאֵל פָּרוּ וַיִּשְׁרְצוּ וַיִּרְבּוּ וַיַּעַצְמוּ 
בִּמְאֹד מְאֹד וַתִּמָּלֵא הָאָרֶץ אֹתָם: 
וָרָב, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וָאֶעֱבֹר עָלַיִךְ 
וָאֶרְאֵךְ מִתְבּוֹסֶסֶת בְּדָמָיִךְ, וָאֹמַר לָךְ 
בְּדָמַיִךְ חֲיִי, וָאֹמַר לָךְ בְּדָמַיִךְ חֲיִי: 
רְבָבָה כְּצֶמַח הַשָּׂדֶה נְתַתִּיךְ, וַתִּרְבִּי 
וַתִּגְדְּלִי וַתָּבֹאִי בַּעֲדִי עֲדָיִים, שָׁדַיִם 
נָכֹנוּ וּשְׂעָרֵךְ צִמֵּחַ, וְאַתְּ עֵרֹם וְעֶרְיָה: 
with very few people…
That’s just like Moses said: 
“There were only seventy people when your 
fathers descended to Egypt. But now, God 
your God has made you as plentiful as the 
stars of the heavens.”
…but he ended up being a people…
That tells us that the Jewish People stood out 
there. They were a distinct people, a people 
apart. 
…a mighty people, powerful…
That’s a reference to what the Exodus story 
tells: 
“And the Children of Israel were fruitful and 
swarmed and increased and became very, very 
powerful. The land was filled with them.” 
…and populous.
Like the prophet Ezekiel described the Jewish 
People when God saved them from Egypt 
(using powerful metaphors that cry out for 
unpacking):
“ And I passed over you and I saw you 
wallowing in your blood.
So I said to you, ‘In your blood shall you live.’ 
And I said to you, ‘In your blood shall you 
live.’ I made you thrive like the plants of the 
field, and you grew and you matured and 
you became very beautiful, your bosom well-
formed and your hair grown long. But you 
were naked and bare.”

=== Page 49 ===

48
THE HAGGADAH doesn’t unpack these metaphors, but here’s the tradition‑
al meaning:
In Egypt, we were downtrodden and beaten till we bled. But God gave us two 
blood‑mit
zvahs so that we would be worthy of liberation: The blood of the 
Passover lamb that we painted on our doorposts, and the blood of circumci‑
sion (since all males had to circumcise before leaving).
The oppression of Egypt that was meant to destroy us actually made us 
greater, more powerful, more mature and much more beautiful in God’s 
eyes. The women were determined to continue having children, and so they 
prettied themselves up and brought food to eat with their husbands out in 
the field. This way, they ensured the continuity of the Jewish people. 
But we were still naked and bare. Mitzvahs are clothing for the soul. We had 
to get to Sinai to get that clothing.31 
Unpacking a Packed Passage, Part 2 
 Someone else out loud:
וַיָּרֵעוּ 
אֹתָנוּ הַמִּצְרִים 
וַיְעַנּוּנוּ, וַיִּתְּנוּ עָלֵינוּ 
עֲבֹדָה קָשָׁה: 
וַיָּרֵעוּ אֹתָנוּ הַמִּצְרִים, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: 
הָבָה נִתְחַכְּמָה לוֹ, פֶּן יִרְבֶּה, וְהָיָה כִּי 
תִקְרֶאנָה מִלְחָמָה, וְנוֹסַף גַּם הוּא עַל 
שֹׂנְאֵינוּ, וְנִלְחַם בָּנוּ וְעָלָה מִן הָאָרֶץ: 
Now let’s take a look at the next verse we would say 
there in the Temple: 
THE Egyptians treated us badly and they made us 
suffer, and they assigned us hard work.
Unpacking that now: 
The Egyptians treated us badly…
That’s a reference to the story in Exodus, 
where Pharaoh says to his people: 
“Come, let us act cunningly with these people. 
Otherwise they’ll keep multiplying, and then, 
what if there’s a war against us? They will join 
our enemies, fight against us, and go up out of 
the land!”
THE LITERAL translation is “The Egyptians made us bad.” Meaning, they 
infected us with their own badness. That’s why we had to be yanked out of 
there fast and earlier than predicted. Which meant that the entire cruci‑
ble‑f
or‑our‑souls eff
ect that Egyptian slavery was meant to accomplish was 
incomplete. And that meant we had to finish off that process in later exiles.32

=== Page 50 ===

MAGID
49
וַיְעַנּוּנוּ, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיָּשִׂימוּ עָלָיו 
שָׂרֵי מִסִּים לְמַעַן עַנֹּתוֹ בְּסִבְלֹתָם, וַיִּבֶן 
עָרֵי מִסְכְּנוֹת לְפַרְעֹה, אֶת פִּתֹם וְאֶת 
רַעַמְסֵס: 
and they made us suffer…
That’s a reference to the next part of the story: 
“They set taskmasters over the Jews to make 
them suffer under their load. The Jews built 
storage cities for Pharaoh, namely Pitom and 
Ramses.” 
וַיִּתְּנוּ עָלֵינוּ עֲבֹדָה קָשָׁה, כְּמָה 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיַּעֲבִדוּ מִצְרַיִם אֶת בְּנֵי 
יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּפָרֶךְ: וַיְמָרֲרוּ אֶת חַיֵּיהֶם 
בַּעֲבֹדָה קָשָׁה בְּחֹמֶר וּבִלְבֵנִים וּבְכָל 
עֲבֹדָה בַּשָּׂדֶה, אֵת כָּל עֲבֹדָתָם אֲשֶׁר 
עָבְדוּ בָהֶם בְּפָרֶךְ: 
and they assigned us hard work.
That’s the next part of the story: 
“The Egyptians made the Children of 
Israel work under body-and-soul-breaking 
conditions. They embittered their lives with 
hard work, with mortar and with bricks and 
all kinds of field work. Everything they made 
them do was to break them.”
IF YOU’RE IDENTIFYING with this story, that may be because it sums up 
the human condition. We’re all slaves of Pharaoh. We’re enslaved by our 
positions in life, by our everyday tasks, and just by having physical bodies. 
That’s our Egypt. 
We feel that way because we don’t really belong where we are. Because we’re 
all God’s children, divine sparks sent to earth on a mission to heal and trans‑
form the world, to build a home for God on a Godly planet. But we can’t do 
that if we stay trapped where we are, stressed out about building yet bigger 
and yet more impressive monuments for our own Pharaohs. 
A plant that is not allowed to grow is imprisoned. The same with an animal 
that’s not allowed to move. Or a human being not allowed to think. And so 
too, a soul not allowed to do all its mitzvahs.33
We need to escape our personal limitations, to break the chains that don’t let 
us complete our divine mission. And that’s our Exodus.
There’s a key difference, however. In Egypt, we could only wait for God to 
take us out from there with miracles and wonders. In our case, God is also 
waiting for us to do some miracles and wonders. 
That’s why He gave us the Torah, to show us how to make miracles. To take 
the mud of a mundane world and transform it into the building bricks of a 
beautiful world. 
We do our miracle, and He will do the rest.34

=== Page 51 ===

50
Unpacking a Packed Passage, Part 3 
 Someone else out loud:
AND we cried out to God, the God of our fathers, 
and God heard our voice and saw our suffering, 
our labor and our oppression. 
Now to unpack that: 
And we cried out to God, the God of our fathers…
That’s how the story in Exodus continues: 
“It was during that long period of time that 
the king of Egypt died. The Children of Israel 
groaned from their labor. They cried out, and 
their cry to be saved from their work rose up 
to God.”
וַנִּצְעַק 
אֶל יְיָ אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵינוּ, 
וַיִּשְׁמַע יְיָ אֶת קֹלֵנוּ, 
וַיַּרְא אֶת עָנְיֵנוּ וְאֶת עֲמָלֵנוּ וְאֶת 
לַחֲצֵנוּ: 
וַנִּצְעַק אֶל יְיָ אֱלֹהֵי אֲבֹתֵינוּ, כְּמָה 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיְהִי בַיָּמִים הָרַבִּים הָהֵם 
וַיָּמָת מֶלֶךְ מִצְרַיִם, וַיֵּאָנְחוּ בְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל 
מִן הָעֲבֹדָה וַיִּזְעָקוּ, וַתַּעַל שַׁוְעָתָם אֶל 
הָאֱלֹהִים מִן הָעֲבֹדָה: 
and God heard our voice…
That’s the next part of the story: 
“God heard their groans, and God 
remembered His covenant that He had made 
with Abraham, with Isaac and with Jacob.”
וַיִּשְׁמַע יְיָ אֶת קֹלֵנוּ, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר 
וַיִּשְׁמַע אֱלֹהִים אֶת נַאֲקָתָם, וַיִּזְכֹּר 
אֱלֹהִים אֶת בְּרִיתוֹ אֶת אַבְרָהָם אֶת 
יִצְחָק וְאֶת יַעֲקֹב: 
and saw our suffering…
That’s referring to how the Egyptians 
disrupted marital relations. That’s also hinted 
to in Exodus: 
“ And God saw the Children of Israel. And God 
knew.”
…our labor…
That’s referring to what Pharaoh told the 
Egyptians to do to the children: 
“Every boy that is born, you shall throw into 
the river, and every girl you shall keep alive.” 
…and our oppression.
That’s talking about the extreme pressure we 
were under, as God noted to Moses: 
“I have seen the oppression with which the 
Egyptians oppress them.” 
וַיַּרְא אֶת עָנְיֵנוּ, זוֹ פְּרִישׁוּת דֶּרֶךְ 
אֶרֶץ, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיַּרְא אֱלֹהִים אֶת 
בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל, וַיֵּדַע אֱלֹהִים: 
וְאֶת עֲמָלֵנוּ, אֵלּוּ הַבָּנִים, כְּמָה 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: כָּל הַבֵּן הַיִּלּוֹד הַיְאֹרָה 
תַּשְׁלִיכֻהוּ, וְכָל הַבַּת תְּחַיּוּן: 
וְאֶת לַחֲצֵנוּ, זֶה הַדְּחַק, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: 
וְגַם רָאִיתִי אֶת הַלַּחַץ אֲשֶׁר מִצְרַיִם 
לֹחֲצִים אֹתָם:

=== Page 52 ===

MAGID
51
WAIT A MINUTE! What’s this “ And God knew” business? Doesn’t God al‑
ways know? Isn’t that part of His job description as Omniscient God? 
But knowing, in Hebrew, means a lot more than awareness. It means engag‑
ing yourself with something. As in “ Adam knew Eve.” You really know some‑
thing only when you engage yourself with it. 
So, yes, God is aware of everything happening in His world. The world hap‑
pens only because He’s aware of it happening. But the point here is that bad 
stuff was happening that got the Creator of the Universe re‑engag
ed with 
His universe. And that re‑engag
ement brought about miracles and libera‑
tion.35
Unpacking a Packed Passage, Part 4 
 Someone else out loud:
AND God took us out of Egypt with a strong 
hand and with an outstretched arm, with a huge 
display, with signs, and with wonders.
Now let’s unpack that:
God took us out of Egypt…
He didn’t send an angel to do the job for Him, 
or a seraph, or a messenger. The same God 
who is beyond everything in this world took 
care of it Himself! That’s also how it’s told in 
the original story: 
“On that night I will pass through the land of 
Egypt. I will strike every firstborn in the land 
of Egypt, from man to beast. And I will carry 
out judgments against all the gods of Egypt, I, 
God.”
“I will pass through the land of Egypt”—I 
Myself, and not an angel. 
“ And I will strike every firstborn in the 
land of Egypt”—I Myself, and not a seraph. 
“ And I will carry out judgments against 
all the gods of Egypt”—I Myself, and not a 
messenger. 
“I, God”—I Myself, and none other. 
וַיּוֹצִיאֵנוּ 
יְיָ מִמִּצְרַיִם 
בְּיָד חֲזָקָה 
וּבִזְרֹעַ נְטוּיָה וּבְמֹרָא גָּדֹל וּבְאֹתוֹת 
וּבְמֹפְתִים: 
וַיּוֹצִיאֵנוּ יְיָ מִמִּצְרַיִם, לֹא עַל יְדֵי 
מַלְאָךְ וְלֹא עַל יְדֵי שָׂרָף וְלֹא עַל 
יְדֵי שָׁלִיחַ, אֶלָּא הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא 
בִּכְבוֹדוֹ וּבְעַצְמוֹ, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: 
וְעָבַרְתִּי בְאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם בַּלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה, 
וְהִכֵּיתִי כָל בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם מֵאָדָם 
וְעַד בְּהֵמָה, וּבְכָל אֱלֹהֵי מִצְרַיִם 
אֶעֱשֶׂה שְׁפָטִים, אֲנִי יְיָ: 
וְעָבַרְתִּי בְאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם, אֲנִי וְלֹא 
מַלְאָךְ. וְהִכֵּיתִי כָל בְּכוֹר בְּאֶרֶץ 
מִצְרַיִם, אֲנִי וְלֹא שָׂרָף. וּבְכָל אֱלֹהֵי 
מִצְרַיִם אֶעֱשֶׂה שְׁפָטִים, אֲנִי וְלֹא 
הַשָּׁלִיחַ. אֲנִי יְיָ, אֲנִי הוּא וְלֹא אַחֵר:

=== Page 53 ===

52
…with a strong hand…
That’s talking about the disease that struck 
the Egyptian livestock:
“ And now, the hand of God will be on your 
livestock in the field—on the horses, the 
donkeys, the camels, the herds and the flocks. 
It will be a very severe disease.”
…with an outstretched arm…
That’s referring to the heavenly sword that 
struck the firstborn Egyptians. How do we 
know? Because “stretching out” is used when 
talking about swords,36 as in: 
“His sword was drawn in his hand, stretched 
out over Jerusalem.” 
…with a huge display
That’s talking about the open display of God’s 
presence (a.k.a. “the Shechinah”). Moses 
later pointed this out to the people, when he 
(rhetorically) asked: 
“Has any god ever tried to extract a nation for 
himself out of another nation? And do it with 
proofs, signs and wonders, with war and with 
a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and 
with huge displays? Well, that’s what God your 
God did for you in Egypt right before your 
very eyes.”
בְּיָד חֲזָקָה, זֶה הַדֶּבֶר, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר 
הִנֵּה יַד יְיָ הוֹיָה בְּמִקְנְךָ אֲשֶׁר בַּשָּׂדֶה, 
בַּסּוּסִים בַּחֲמֹרִים בַּגְּמַלִּים בַּבָּקָר 
וּבַצֹּאן, דֶּבֶר כָּבֵד מְאֹד: 
וּבִזְרֹעַ נְטוּיָה, זוֹ הַחֶרֶב, כְּמָה 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וְחַרְבּוֹ שְׁלוּפָה בְּיָדוֹ נְטוּיָה 
עַל יְרוּשָׁלָיִם: 
וּבְמֹרָא גָּדֹל, זֶה גִּלּוּי שְׁכִינָה, כְּמָה 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: אוֹ הֲנִסָּה אֱלֹהִים לָבוֹא 
לָקַחַת לוֹ גוֹי מִקֶּרֶב גּוֹי בְּמַסֹּת בְּאֹתֹת 
וּבְמוֹפְתִים וּבְמִלְחָמָה וּבְיָד חֲזָקָה 
וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה וּבְמוֹרָאִים גְּדֹלִים, כְּכֹל 
אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה לָכֶם יְיָ אֱלֹהֵיכֶם בְּמִצְרַיִם 
לְעֵינֶיךָ: 
HEY, that’s a good point, isn’t it? Why does no one else have a story about 
their people being miraculously liberated and entering into a covenant with 
God? It seems it never occurred anywhere else. And it’s not something you 
can make up and pass off as national history—otherwise, for sure some other 
people would have come up with the same idea.

=== Page 54 ===

MAGID
53
…and with signs…
That’s talking about Moses’ staff.
God told Moses that when Pharaoh would ask 
for a sign that it really was God sending him, 
he should throw down his staff and it would 
turn into a snake.
When Pharaoh’s research team pulled off 
a simulation of that exercise, Moses’ staff-
snake reverted to stick-snake status—and then 
devoured the Egyptian specimens. That was 
a sign that Moses really was representing the 
Creator of heaven and earth. 
In fact, God explicitly made this connection 
when He first told Moses to take the staff with 
Him. He said: 
“Take this staff in your hand. You’re going to 
do signs with it.”
…and with wonders…
That refers to the miracle of turning the 
waters of the Nile into blood. There’s a verse 
that makes that connection: 
“I will show wonders in heaven and on earth…
וּבְאֹתוֹת, זֶה הַמַּטֶּה, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר 
וְאֶת הַמַּטֶּה הַזֶּה תִּקַּח בְּיָדֶךָ, אֲשֶׁר 
תַּעֲשֶׂה בּוֹ אֶת הָאֹתֹת: 
וּבְמוֹפְתִים, זֶה הַדָּם, כְּמָה שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: 
וְנָתַתִּי מוֹפְתִים בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ— 
And the next word is “blood.” But just hold on to that, because we’re about to do…

=== Page 55 ===

54
The Traditional Wine-Spilling Ceremony 
Here’s what’s going to happen right now: You’re about to complete this verse, with its 
reference to blood and other stuff. But as you do it, you and everyone else at the table 
are going to pour out a few drops of wine for every mention of a plague.
This wine-spilling ceremony is very precise. You hold your cup of wine in your right 
hand. You pour just a little wine, one tiny spill as you say each word, into a broken 
bowl. You don’t want to drink wine that’s associated with plagues, so it’s important that 
you have in mind that you’re not saying them over the wine in the cup, but on the wine 
that you’re pouring out of the cup—which you’ll dispose of later.
NOW HERE’S THE KABBALISTIC INSTRUCTIONS: The cup is acting as 
what the Kabbalists refer to as Malchut. That’s the last and ultimate of the 
ten modalities by which God creates and directs the world. 
You’re pouring wine that’s acting as what Kabbalists refer to as “anger and 
wrath” out of that cup. 
You’re doing this with the power of Understanding. That’s the second of the 
Ten Divine Modalities. 
You’re pouring it into a broken container, which is the secret of kelipah, 
which is called “cursed.” Kelipah means a shell, or a husk. It’s the way God’s 
light is obstructed, so that things appear separate from Him. That’s how evil 
emerges. 
Wine that remains in the cup once we’re done is called “wine that brings 
happiness.” 
If we pour out wine because we’re concerned that they absorbed bad energy 
from mention of the plagues, how much more careful we should be to speak 
only good things when we eat and drink the whole year long. It’s important 
not only that you consume good food, but that you also consume it in a good 
way, thinking and saying the right things, so that you’ll get the right energy 
out of your food.37
Pour a drop of wine from your cup into a broken dish as you say each of the 
following three phrases:
דָּם 
וָאֵשׁ 
וְתִימְרוֹת עָשָׁן: 
blood (Dahm)
and fire (Vah-aysh)
and pillars of smoke as tall as date 
palms. (Veh-tim-roht ah-shahn)

=== Page 56 ===

MAGID
55
 Someone out loud:
ALL that was one unpacking of “a strong hand and 
with an outstretched arm, with a huge display, with 
signs, and with wonders.” Now for another one: 
A strong hand—just “hand” would be one plague, 
but “strong hand” must be two.
An outstretched arm—another two plagues: arm + 
outstretched. 
A huge display—two more: huge + display. 
Signs—plural, so two more. 
Wonders—also plural, so another two. 
2 x 5 = 10. 
THOSE are the Ten Plagues that the Holy One, 
blessed be He, brought upon the Egyptians, 
namely… 
דָּבָר 
אַחֵר: בְּיָד חֲזָקָה שְׁתַּיִם, 
וּבִזְרֹעַ נְטוּיָה שְׁתַּיִם, 
וּבְמֹרָא גָּדֹל שְׁתַּיִם, וּבְאֹתוֹת שְׁתַּיִם, 
וּבְמוֹפְתִים שְׁתַּיִם: 
אֵלּוּ 
עֶשֶׂר מַכּוֹת שֶׁהֵבִיא 
הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַל 
הַמִּצְרִים בְּמִצְרַיִם, וְאֵלּוּ הֵן:

=== Page 57 ===

56
The BIG Traditional Wine-Spilling Ceremony 
Hold on. You’re about to spill from your cup thirteen more times—once as you mention 
each plague, and then three more. Have in mind just the same as we had above. 
By the time we’re done, you’ll have poured a total of sixteen spills. At that point, the 
wine remaining will have become “wine that makes joy”—so you won’t spill out any 
more. Instead, you’ll add more wine to the cup at that point, so that it will be full. 
Pour a drop of wine from your cup into a broken dish as you say each of the ten 
plagues (ten spills in all):
דָּם 
צְפַרְדֵּעַ 
כִּנִּים
עָרוֹב 
דֶּבֶר 
שְׁחִין 
בָּרָד 
אַרְבֶּה 
חֹשֶׁךְ 
מַכַּת בְּכוֹרוֹת 
Blood (Dahm)
Frogs (Tze-fahr-day-ah)
Lice (Kee-neem)
Wild Beasts (Ah-rohv)
Livestock Disease (Deh-vehr)
Boils (Sheh-kheen)
Hail (Bah-rahd)
Locusts (Ahr-beh)
Darkness (Khoh-shehkh)
Slaying of the Firstborn 
(Mah-kaht beh-khoh-roht.)

=== Page 58 ===

MAGID
57
 Everyone:
RABBI Yehudah gave us a way to remember these 
ten plagues in order, by combining the first letter 
of each, forming three words: 
רַבִּי 
יְהוּדָה הָיָה נוֹתֵן בָּהֶם 
סִמָּנִים: 
Pour out a drop of wine as you say each of these, with the same thoughts as above. 
 Everyone:
Once you’re done, remove that dish with the wine you spilled and dispose of that 
wine. Now refill your cups all the way. 
Counting the Plagues 
 Someone out loud:
Remember the five rabbis who were sitting around the entire night, telling the Passover 
story? Here’s another instance where three of those rabbis were discussing Exodus 
stuff:
IT SEEMS these rabbis understood the plagues as a sort of detox program 
for Egypt. People’s behavior, words and thoughts leave negative energy in 
the environment. The plagues of blood, frogs, etc., were the effects of that 
negativity being released. That bad energy wasn’t letting us leave. But once it 
was cleaned up, we could get released too. 
All matter is composed of four qualities that the ancients called fire, wind, 
water and earth. We would probably call them positive, negative, matter 
and antimatter.38 And then there’s the quintessence of everything, the very 
fabric of existence. 
If the human being is capable only of affecting the outer layer of reality, then 
each plague was one detox. But if we affect the basic elements of reality, 
then a quadruple detox was needed. And if human behavior affects the core 
substance of reality, then each plague had to be a five‑s
tep program.39 
דְּצַ"ךְ 
עֲדַ"שׁ 
בְּאַחַ"ב 
Blood, Frogs, Lice (Deh-tzahkh)
Wild Beasts, Livestock Disease, 
Boils (Ah-dahsh)
Hail, Locusts, Darkness, Firstborn 
(Beh-ah-khav)

=== Page 59 ===

58
רַבִּי 
יוֹסֵי הַגְּלִילִי אוֹמֵר: מִנַּיִן 
אַתָּה אוֹמֵר שֶׁלָּקוּ הַמִּצְרִים 
בְּמִצְרַיִם עֶשֶׂר מַכּוֹת וְעַל הַיָּם לָקוּ 
חֲמִשִּׁים מַכּוֹת, 
בְּמִצְרַיִם מַה הוּא אוֹמֵר: וַיֹּאמְרוּ 
הַחַרְטֻמִּם אֶל פַּרְעֹה אֶצְבַּע אֱלֹהִים 
הִיא: 
וְעַל הַיָּם מַה הוּא אוֹמֵר: וַיַּרְא יִשְׂרָאֵל 
אֶת הַיָּד הַגְּדֹלָה אֲשֶׁר עָשָׂה יְיָ 
בְּמִצְרַיִם, וַיִּירְאוּ הָעָם אֶת יְיָ, וַיַּאֲמִינוּ 
בַּייָ וּבְמֹשֶׁה עַבְדּוֹ: כַּמָּה לָקוּ בְאֶצְבַּע, 
עֶשֶׂר מַכּוֹת, אֱמוֹר מֵעַתָּה: 
בְּמִצְרַיִם לָקוּ עֶשֶׂר מַכּוֹת, וְעַל הַיָּם 
לָקוּ חֲמִשִּׁים מַכּוֹת: 
RABBI Yosai (who was from the Galilee) 
calculated the number of plagues at the splitting 
of the sea like this: 
How do we know that the Egyptians were struck 
by ten plagues in Egypt, and then were struck by 
fifty plagues at the splitting of the Sea of Reeds? 
Well, I’ll tell you: In Egypt, the magicians said to 
Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” 
And at the sea, it says that “Israel saw the great 
hand that God laid against Egypt; and the people 
feared God, and they believed in God and in His 
servant Moses.” 
Now, by how many plagues were they struck 
when they called it “the finger of God”? Ten 
plagues! Being struck by God’s hand must mean 
five times that, right? So you have to conclude 
that in Egypt they were struck by ten plagues, but 
at the sea they were struck by fifty plagues! 
 Someone else out loud:
רַבִּי 
אֱלִיעֶזֶר אוֹמֵר: מִנַּיִן שֶׁכָּל 
מַכָּה וּמַכָּה שֶׁהֵבִיא הַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַל הַמִּצְרִים בְּמִצְרַיִם 
הָיְתָה שֶׁל אַרְבַּע מַכּוֹת, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: יְשַׁלַּח בָּם חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ, עֶבְרָה, 
וָזַעַם, וְצָרָה, מִשְׁלַחַת מַלְאֲכֵי רָעִים: 
עֶבְרָה אַחַת, וָזַעַם שְׁתַּיִם, וְצָרָה 
שָׁלֹשׁ, מִשְׁלַחַת מַלְאֲכֵי רָעִים אַרְבַּע, 
אֱמוֹר מֵעַתָּה: בְּמִצְרַיִם לָקוּ אַרְבָּעִים 
מַכּוֹת, וְעַל הַיָּם לָקוּ מָאתַיִם מַכּוֹת: 
RABBI Eliezer took this calculation a step further.
How do we know that each individual plague 
which God brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt 
consisted of four plagues? 
Well, I’ll tell you: 
Here’s how the Psalms describes the plagues: “He 
sent against them His fierce anger, fury, wrath, 
and torment, a dispatch of nasty angels.” 
Fury is one. 
Wrath makes two. 
Torment makes three. 
Dispatch of nasty angels makes four. 
4 x 10 = 40. So it turns out that in Egypt they were 
struck by forty plagues. 
40 x 5 = 200. So at the sea they were struck by two 
hundred plagues.

=== Page 60 ===

MAGID
59
 Someone else out loud:
רַבִּי 
עֲקִיבָא אוֹמֵר: מִנַּיִן שֶׁכָּל 
מַכָּה וּמַכָּה שֶׁהֵבִיא הַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא עַל הַמִּצְרִים בְּמִצְרַיִם 
הָיְתָה שֶׁל חָמֵשׁ מַכּוֹת, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: יְשַׁלַּח בָּם חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ, עֶבְרָה, 
וָזַעַם, וְצָרָה, מִשְׁלַחַת מַלְאֲכֵי רָעִים: 
חֲרוֹן אַפּוֹ אַחַת, עֶבְרָה שְׁתַּיִם, וָזַעַם 
שָׁלֹשׁ, וְצָרָה אַרְבַּע, מִשְׁלַחַת מַלְאֲכֵי 
רָעִים חָמֵשׁ, 
אֱמוֹר מֵעַתָּה: בְּמִצְרַיִם לָקוּ חֲמִשִּׁים 
מַכּוֹת, וְעַל הַיָּם לָקוּ חֲמִשִּׁים וּמָאתַיִם 
מַכּוֹת: 
RABBI Akiva took it even further. 
How do we know that each individual plague 
which God brought upon the Egyptians in Egypt 
consisted of (not four, but) five plagues? 
Well, I’ll tell you: Let’s go back to how the Psalms 
describes the plagues: 
“He sent against them His fierce anger, fury, 
wrath, and torment, a dispatch of nasty angels.” 
Fierce anger is one. 
Fury is two. 
Wrath makes three. 
Torment makes four. 
A dispatch of nasty angels makes five. 
5 x 10 = 50. So it turns out that in Egypt they were 
struck by fifty plagues. 
50 x 5 = 250. And at the sea they were stricken by 
250 plagues! 
THE NEED for such a great number of plagues is an indication of how 
deeply we were held captive by the bad energy of Egypt. All of that had to be 
flushed out by these plagues before we could be torn out of there. Which is 
all the more we have to be grateful for. 
And that explains why this leads into…

=== Page 61 ===

60
Showing Appreciation (Dayenu) 
 Someone or Everyone: 
Having counted all the goodness God has done for us, we burst out:40 
כַּמָּה 
מַעֲלוֹת טוֹבוֹת לַמָּקוֹם 
עָלֵינוּ: 
אִלּוּ הוֹצִיאָנוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם וְלֹא עָשָׂה בָהֶם 
שְׁפָטִים, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ עָשָׂה בָהֶם שְׁפָטִים וְלֹא עָשָׂה 
בֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ עָשָׂה בֵאלֹהֵיהֶם וְלֹא הָרַג אֶת 
בְּכוֹרֵיהֶם, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ הָרַג אֶת בְּכוֹרֵיהֶם וְלֹא נָתַן לָנוּ 
אֶת מָמוֹנָם, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ נָתַן לָנוּ אֶת מָמוֹנָם וְלֹא קָרַע לָנוּ 
אֶת הַיָּם, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ קָרַע לָנוּ אֶת הַיָּם וְלֹא הֶעֱבִירָנוּ 
בְתוֹכוֹ בֶּחָרָבָה, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ הֶעֱבִירָנוּ בְתוֹכוֹ בֶּחָרָבָה וְלֹא 
שִׁקַּע צָרֵינוּ בְּתוֹכוֹ, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ שִׁקַּע צָרֵינוּ בְּתוֹכוֹ וְלֹא סִפֵּק 
צָרְכֵּנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
Wow! How many levels upon levels of favors did the 
One Who Encompasses Everything do for us! 
If He had just brought us out from Egypt, 
but didn’t carry out judgments against them, 
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had carried out judgments against them, 
but not against their idols,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had destroyed their idols, 
but not struck their firstborn, 
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had struck their firstborn, 
but not given us their valuables, 
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had given us their valuables, 
but not split the sea for us, 
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had split the sea for us, 
but not taken us through it comfortably on dry land,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had taken us through the sea on dry land,  
but not drowned our oppressors in it,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had drowned our oppressors in it,  
 but not supplied our needs in the desert f
or forty 
years, 
that would have been good enough for us! 
אִלּוּ סִפֵּק צָרְכֵּנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר אַרְבָּעִים 
שָׁנָה וְלֹא הֶאֱכִילָנוּ אֶת הַמָּן, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
If He had supplied our needs in the desert for forty 
years,  
but not fed us the manna,  
that would have been good enough for us!

=== Page 62 ===

MAGID
61
אִלּוּ הֶאֱכִילָנוּ אֶת הַמָּן וְלֹא נָתַן לָנוּ 
אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ נָתַן לָנוּ אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת וְלֹא קֵרְבָנוּ 
לִפְנֵי הַר סִינַי, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ קֵרְבָנוּ לִפְנֵי הַר סִינַי וְלֹא נָתַן לָנוּ 
אֶת הַתּוֹרָה, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ נָתַן לָנוּ אֶת הַתּוֹרָה וְלֹא הִכְנִיסָנוּ 
לְאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
אִלּוּ הִכְנִיסָנוּ לְאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל וְלֹא בָנָה 
לָנוּ אֶת בֵּית הַבְּחִירָה, דַּיֵּנוּ: 
If He had fed us the manna,  
but not given us the Shabbat,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had given us the Shabbat,  
but not brought us before Mount Sinai,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had brought us to hear and see God speak at 
Mount Sinai,  
but not given us the Torah,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had given us the Torah,  
but not brought us into the land of Israel,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
If He had brought us into the land of Israel,  
but not built for us the Chosen Temple,  
that would have been good enough for us! 
You can sing this in the original Hebrew as well. Here’s the first stanza:  Everyone:
Ee-loo hoh-tzee-ah-noo, mee-mitz-rah-yim  
veh-loh ah-sah bah-hehm sheh-fah-teem dah-yay-noo!
Ee-loo ah-sah bah-hehm sheh-fah-teem  
veh-loh ah-sah vay-loh-hay-hehm dah-yay-noo!

=== Page 63 ===

62
 Someone out loud:
עַל 
 אַחַת כַּמָּה וְכַמָּה 
טוֹבָה כְפוּלָה וּמְכֻפֶּלֶת 
לַמָּקוֹם עָלֵינוּ, 
שֶׁהוֹצִיאָנוּ מִמִּצְרָיִם, 
וְעָשָׂה בָהֶם שְׁפָטִים, 
וְעָשָׂה בֵאלֹהֵיהֶם, 
וְהָרַג אֶת בְּכוֹרֵיהֶם, 
וְנָתַן לָנוּ אֶת מָמוֹנָם, 
וְקָרַע לָנוּ אֶת הַיָּם, 
וְהֶעֱבִירָנוּ בְתוֹכוֹ בֶּחָרָבָה, 
וְשִׁקַּע צָרֵינוּ בְּתוֹכוֹ, 
וְסִפֵּק צָרְכֵּנוּ בַּמִּדְבָּר אַרְבָּעִים שָׁנָה, 
וְהֶאֱכִילָנוּ אֶת הַמָּן, 
וְנָתַן לָנוּ אֶת הַשַּׁבָּת, 
וְקֵרְבָנוּ לִפְנֵי הַר סִינַי, 
וְנָתַן לָנוּ אֶת הַתּוֹרָה, 
וְהִכְנִיסָנוּ לְאֶרֶץ יִשְׂרָאֵל, 
וּבָנָה לָנוּ אֶת בֵּית הַבְּחִירָה לְכַפֵּר עַל 
כָּל עֲוֹנוֹתֵינוּ: 
IF so, how much more so should we be grateful 
to the One Who Encompasses Everything for the 
doubled and redoubled goodness that He has 
done for us! 
He brought us out of Egypt 
And He carried out judgments against them 
And He did the same to their idols 
And He struck their firstborn 
And He gave us their belongings 
And He split the sea for us 
And He took us through it on dry land 
And He drowned our oppressors in it 
And He supplied our needs in the desert for forty 
years 
And He fed us the manna 
And He gave us the Shabbat 
And He brought us before Mount Sinai 
And He gave us the Torah 
And He brought us into the land of Israel 
And He built the Chosen Temple for us, so we 
could atone for all we may have done wrong. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

=== Page 64 ===

MAGID
63
THIS IS WHERE the Exodus storytelling section signs off. But why must the 
last line of the story be about cleaning up “all our sins”? Especially since that 
didn’t happen until hundreds of years after the Exodus. 
And anyways, if we’re going to mention the Chosen Temple in Jerusalem, 
why do we have to harp on the sin thing? How about the fact that God’s 
presence filled that special place?
When you know the inside story of the Exodus, it all makes sense. 
The Exodus was meant to heal the Tree of Knowledge affair—when we got 
booted out of the Garden of Eden. We became slaves to our own egos, which 
led to becoming slaves to egomaniacs who built empires, and eventually 
slaves to our credit cards. 
The Egypt stint—suffering enslavement and then breaking out of bondage—
was meant to heal all that. But the operation was prematurely aborted when 
the Egyptians went overboard on the oppression stuff. Our souls had to wait 
until the Temple was built in Jerusalem to complete their rehab. 
And since that went haywire as well, the journey of Exodus has continued 
until now. Until, very soon, as the Third Temple is constructed, all of hu‑
manity will experience the ultimate exodus from our ego‑bondag
e. We will 
finally be back in that Garden of Eden state of being. 
But it will be way beyond better this time around, because we won’t just be 
plopped down in there. We will be there through our own choices and hard 
work. It will be a Chosen Temple—built of our making the right choices.
May that Third and Final Chosen Temple be built sooner than we can imag‑
ine.41
The Essentials
 Leader:
רַבָּן 
גַּמְלִיאֵל הָיָה אוֹמֵר: כָּל 
שֶׁלֹא אָמַר שְׁלֹשָׁה דְבָרִים 
 אֵלּוּ בַּפֶּסַח לֹא יָצָא יְדֵי חוֹבָתוֹ. 
וְאֵלּוּ הֵן: 
RABBAN Gamliel used to say that anyone who 
didn’t mention the following three things on 
Passover, didn’t really do the Seder right.
So everyone say together: Everyone:
Pesach! Matzah!…and Maror!
פֶּסַח, מַצָּﬣ וּמָרוֹר 
Leader:
Actually, he didn’t just mean to mention them. He meant to explain what they’re there 
for. So let’s do that. Again, tonight we always start with a question:

=== Page 65 ===

64
Pesach
 Everyone:
פֶּסַח 
שֶׁהָיוּ אֲבוֹתֵינוּ אוֹכְלִים 
בִּזְמַן שֶׁבֵּית הַמִּקְדָּשׁ קַיָּם 
עַל שׁוּם מָה, 
THE Pesach is the Passover offering that our 
ancestors ate in the time when the Holy Temple 
was standing. What was that all about?
עַל שׁוּם שֶׁפָּסַח הַמָּקוֹם עַל בָּתֵּי 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ בְּמִצְרָיִם, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַאֲמַרְתֶּם זֶבַח פֶּסַח הוּא 
לַייָ אַשֶׁר פָּסַח עַל בָּתֵּי בְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל 
בְּמִצְרַיִם בְּנָגְפּוֹ אֶת מִצְרַיִם וְאֶת בָּתֵּינוּ 
הִצִּיל, וַיִּקֹּד הָעָם וַיִשְׁתַּחֲווּ: 
It was because Pesach means to skip over. And 
the One Who Encompasses Everything skipped 
over our ancestors’ houses in Egypt. When we 
were about to leave Egypt, Moses told us how 
to explain eating matzah on Passover to future 
generations. He said:
“You shall say, ‘It is a Pesach offering to God, 
because He skipped over the houses of the 
Children of Israel in Egypt when He struck 
the Egyptians with a plague, and He saved our 
houses.’ And the people bowed and prostrated 
themselves.”

=== Page 66 ===

MAGID
65
Matzah
Now hold on to the top two matzahs inside their cloth, and say together:
 Everyone:
מַצָּה 
 זוֹ שֶׁאָנוּ אוֹכְלִים עַל 
שׁוּם מָה, 
THIS matzah that we eat, what’s it all about? 
You can let go of the matzah at this point.
עַל שׁוּם שֶׁלֹא הִסְפִּיק בְּצֶקֶת שֶׁל 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ לְהַחֲמִיץ עַד שֶׁנִּגְלָה עֲלֵיהֶם 
מֶלֶךְ מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ 
הוּא וּגְאָלָם, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיֹּאפוּ אֶת הַבָּצֵק אַשֶׁר 
הוֹצִיאוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם עֻגוֹת מַצּוֹת, כִּי לֹא 
חָמֵץ, כִּי גֹרְשׁוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם וְלֹא יָכְלוּ 
 לְהִתְמַהְמֵהַּ, וְגַם צֵדָה לֹא 
עָשׂוּ לָהֶם: 
It’s because the dough of our ancestors hadn’t 
had enough time to rise, when suddenly the King 
of the kings of kings, the Holy One Blessed Be He, 
revealed Himself to them and liberated them.
Just like it says in the story:
“They baked matzah from the dough that they 
had brought out of Egypt, because it hadn’t 
become chametz—because they had been chased 
out of Egypt and didn’t have a chance to stick 
around waiting for the dough to rise. They didn’t 
even have time to pack anything else to eat.” 
WE RAN OUT OF EGYPT. We never really internalized what was happening 
with us. And when you don’t internalize your freedom, when it’s just some‑
thing that was handed to you, you’re never truly free.
But in Messianic times, we won’t have to run. Why? Because that time 
around, our liberation will have been achieved through our own hard work 
and suffering over these many years of exile. So it will be real, through and 
through.
Besides, there won’t be anything left to run from. Everything of this world 
will remain, and it will all be good. Because everything God made is inher‑
ently good. It’s just left up to us to reveal that good, each one of us, through 
our own work.42

=== Page 67 ===

Maror
Now put your hand over the maror—that’s the bitter vegetables on the plate—and 
say together: 
 Everyone:
מָרוֹר 
זֶה שֶׁאָנוּ אוֹכְלִים עַל 
שׁוּם מָה, 
THIS bitter vegetable that we eat, what’s it all 
about?
You can take your hand back now.
עַל שׁוּם שֶׁמֵּרְרוּ הַמִּצְרִים אֶת חַיֵּי 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ בְּמִצְרָיִם, 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וַיְמָרְרוּ אֶת חַיֵּיהֶם בַּעֲבֹדָה 
קָשָׁה בְּחֹמֶר וּבִלְבֵנִים וּבְכָל עֲבֹדָה 
בַּשָּׂדֶה, אֵת כָּל עֲבֹדָתָם אַשֶׁר עָבְדוּ 
בָהֶם בְּפָרֶךְ: 
It’s because the Egyptians embittered the lives of 
our ancestors in Egypt.
Just like it says in the story:
“They embittered their lives with hard work, 
with mortar and with bricks and all kinds of field 
work. Everything they made them do was to 
break them.” 
WHAT IS the most important thing to have at a Seder? A Jew. 
The matzah at your table didn’t leave Egypt. Neither did the wine or the bit‑
ter herbs. The lamb isn’t even here. The Jew is the only thing here that’s real. 
The Jew actually left Egypt.
Once he or she is here, the matzah is the matzah that he took with him from 
Egypt, the bitter herbs are the bitterness of his slavery, the wine is the taste 
of freedom, and the lamb—we’ll have that soon, also.
66

=== Page 68 ===

MAGID
67
In First Person
 Someone out loud:
בְּכָל 
דּוֹר וָדוֹר חַיָּב אָדָם 
לִרְאוֹת אֶת עַצְמוֹ כְּאִלּוּ 
הוּא יָצָא מִמִּצְרָיִם, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וְהִגַּדְתָּ 
לְבִנְךָ בַּיּוֹם הַהוּא לֵאמֹר בַּעֲבוּר זֶה 
עָשָׂה יְיָ לִי בְּצֵאתִי מִמִּצְרָיִם: לֹא אֶת 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ בִּלְבָד גָּאַל הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ 
הוּא מִמִּצְרַיִם, אֶלָּא אַף אוֹתָנוּ גָּאַל 
עִמָּהֶם, שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: וְאוֹתָנוּ הוֹצִיא מִשָּׁם 
לְמַעַן הָבִיא אוֹתָנוּ לָתֶת לָנוּ אֶת 
הָאָרֶץ אֲשֶׁר נִשְׁבַּע לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ: 
IN every single generation, every person has to 
see him or herself as though he or she actually 
left Egypt. That’s what it says:
“ And you shall tell the story to your child on that 
day, saying, ‘So that I would do all this Seder and 
tell this story—that’s why God did all that for me 
when I left Egypt.’”
It wasn’t just our ancestors that the Holy One 
Blessed Be He liberated from Egypt—He liberated 
us along with them. Like it says:
“It was us that He took out from there, so that He 
could bring us here, to give us the land that He 
promised to our ancestors.”
THE EGYPTIANS ruled over our bodies and our spirits. When we left Egypt, 
our spirits were eternally liberated. Whatever our oppressors inflicted upon 
us, we always retained the power at any moment to connect to the Infinite, 
and with a mitzvah, with a prayer, with a few words of Torah, we were free.
That is what a mitzvah is all about—a connection to the Infinite, available at 
all times, in all places.43
Blessing on the Second Cup
Now we cover the matzah and lift up our cups. And we all say: 
 Everyone:
לְפִיכָךְ 
אֲנַחְנוּ חַיָּבִים: 
לְהוֹדוֹת לְהַלֵּל 
לְשַׁבֵּחַ לְפָאֵר לְרוֹמֵם לְהַדֵּר לְבָרֵךְ 
לְעַלֵּה וּלְקַלֵּס, לְמִי שֶׁעָשָׂה לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ 
וְלָנוּ אֶת כָּל הַנִּסִּים הָאֵלּוּ. הוֹצִיאָנוּ 
מֵעַבְדוּת לְחֵרוּת, מִיָּגוֹן לְשִׂמְחָה, 
וּמֵאֵבֶל לְיוֹם טוֹב, וּמֵאֲפֵלָה לְאוֹר 
גָּדוֹל, וּמִשִּׁעְבּוּד לִגְאֻלָּה, וְנֹאמַר לְפָנָיו 
הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
THAT’S why it’s up to us to thank, to praise, to 
rave about, to glorify, to exalt, to acclaim, to bless, 
to raise up and to pay homage to the One who did 
all these miracles for our ancestors and for us. 
He took us out of slavery to freedom, from misery 
to joy, from mourning to celebration, from murky 
darkness to great light, and from oppression to 
liberation. 
So let’s give Him some praise, by saying 
Halleluyah:
Cups can be put down here for a minute.

=== Page 69 ===

68
הַלְלוּיָהּ 
הַלְלוּ עַבְדֵי יְיָ, 
הַלְלוּ אֶת שֵׁם יְיָ: 
יְהִי שֵׁם יְיָ מְבֹרָךְ, מֵעַתָּה וְעַד עוֹלָם: 
 מִמִּזְרַח שֶׁמֶשׁ עַד מְבוֹאוֹ, מְהֻלָּל 
שֵׁם יְיָ: רָם עַל כָּל גּוֹיִם יְיָ, עַל הַשָּׁמַיִם 
כְּבוֹדוֹ: מִי כַּייָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ, הַמַּגְבִּיהִי 
לָשָׁבֶת: הַמַּשְׁפִּילִי לִרְאוֹת, בַּשָּׁמַיִם 
וּבָאָרֶץ: מְקִימִי מֵעָפָר דָּל, מֵאַשְׁפֹּת 
יָרִים אֶבְיוֹן: לְהוֹשִׁיבִי עִם נְדִיבִים, 
עִם נְדִיבֵי עַמּוֹ: מוֹשִׁיבִי עֲקֶרֶת הַבַּיִת, 
אֵם הַבָּנִים שְׂמֵחָה, הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
HALLELUYAH! 
Offer praise, you servants of God! praise the name 
of God.
May God’s name be blessed now and forever.
From sunrise to sunset, God’s name is praised. 
God is way beyond anything people of this world 
could imagine, way beyond anything the heavenly 
beings can imagine. 
Who is like God our God, who dwells on high yet 
looks down so low upon heaven and earth! 
He raises the poor from the dust, He lifts the 
needy from the trash, to seat them with the major 
donors, with the benefactors of His people. 
He transforms the barren woman to a family 
woman, into a joyful mother of children. 
Halleluyah!
בְּצֵאת 
יִשְׂרָאֵל מִמִּצְרָיִם, 
בֵּית יַעֲקֹב מֵעַם 
לֹעֵז: הָיְתָה יְהוּדָה לְקָדְשׁוֹ, יִשְׂרָאֵל 
מַמְשְׁלוֹתָיו: הַיָּם רָאָה וַיָּנֹס, הַיַּרְדֵּן 
יִסֹּב לְאָחוֹר: הֶהָרִים רָקְדוּ כְאֵילִים, 
גְּבָעוֹת כִּבְנֵי צֹאן: מַה לְּךָ הַיָּם כִּי 
תָנוּס, הַיַּרְדֵּן תִּסֹּב לְאָחוֹר: הֶהָרִים 
תִּרְקְדוּ כְאֵילִים, גְּבָעוֹת כִּבְנֵי צֹאן: 
מִלִּפְנֵי אָדוֹן חוּלִי אָרֶץ, מִלִּפְנֵי אֱלוֹהַּ 
יַעֲקֹב: הַהֹפְכִי הַצּוּר אֲגַם מָיִם, 
חַלָּמִישׁ לְמַעְיְנוֹ מָיִם: 
WHEN Israel went out of Egypt, the House of 
Jacob from a people of a foreign language, Judah 
became His holy one, Israel His dominion. 
The sea saw and split, the Jordan turned back on 
itself. The mountains skipped like rams, the hills 
like young sheep. 
What is with you, O sea, that you split? Jordan, 
that you turn back on yourself? 
Mountains, why do you skip like rams; hills, like 
lambs?
They all answer, “Before the Master, He who bore 
the earth! Before the God of Jacob! 
“He turns hard rock into a pool of water! A 
flintstone into a spring of water!”

=== Page 70 ===

MAGID
69
Pick up those cups again.
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר גְּאָלָנוּ 
וְגָאַל אֶת אֲבוֹתֵינוּ מִמִּצְרַיִם, וְהִגִּיעָנוּ 
הַלַּיְלָה הַזֶּה לֶאֱכָל בּוֹ מַצָּה וּמָרוֹר, 
כֵּן יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ וֵאלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵינוּ יַגִּיעֵנוּ 
לְמוֹעֲדִים וְלִרְגָלִים אֲחֵרִים הַבָּאִים 
לִקְרָאתֵנוּ לְשָׁלוֹם, שְׂמֵחִים בְּבִנְיַן 
עִירֶךָ, וְשָׂשִׂים בַּעֲבוֹדָתֶךָ, 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has liberated us and liberated our 
fathers from Egypt, and got us all the way to this 
night to eat matzah and maror. 
So too, God, our God and God of our fathers, get 
us all the way to the other holidays and festivals 
that are coming to greet us in peace, celebrating 
in the rebuilding of Your city, and rejoicing in 
Your service. 
When the Seder is on Saturday night, say:
וְנֹאכַל שָׁם מִן הַפְּסָחִים וּמִן הַזְּבָחִים Then we shall eat of the Pesach-offerings and of 
the sacrifices...
When the Seder is on any night other than Saturday night:
וְנֹאכַל שָׁם מִן הַזְּבָחִים וּמִן הַפְּסָחִים Then we shall eat of the sacrifices and of the 
Pesach-offerings…
Continue:
אֲשֶׁר יַגִּיעַ דָּמָם עַל קִיר מִזְבַּחֲךָ 
לְרָצוֹן, וְנוֹדֶה לְךָ שִׁיר חָדָשׁ עַל 
גְּאֻלָּתֵנוּ וְעַל פְּדוּת נַפְשֵׁנוּ. בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה 
יְיָ, גָּאַל יִשְׂרָאֵל: 
whose blood shall be sprinkled on the wall of 
Your altar for acceptance; and we shall thank You 
with a new song for our liberation and for the 
rescue of our souls. Blessed are You, God, who 
liberated Israel.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
Now lean to the left and drink your entire second cup of wine—or at least most of it.

=== Page 71 ===

70
Stop and read this before you go further. We’re about to do the matzah thing, and it 
ain’t simple.
This is what’s going to happen now: We’re about to eat a mitzvah. Generally, you just 
do mitzvahs. But, until the Temple is rebuilt, this is the only opportunity in the year that 
we get to actually eat a Biblical mitzvah. Now that’s neat. You’re going to have body 
cells made out of something Godly.
We’re going to eat it while leaning to the left, just like when we drank the wine. That’s 
to show that we are free, and free people don’t have to sit up straight when they eat.
And we’re going to eat a sizable amount of it. Like at least a quarter of a hand-baked 
matzah, or half a machine-baked matzah. If there’s not enough in the top two matzahs 
to give everyone enough to eat, you’ll need to supplement it with some more matzah 
from somewhere else. Just make sure everyone gets a little from the Seder plate 
matzah you’re making the blessing over.
So now let’s start: 
Remember the hand-washing ritual at the beginning of the Seder? Well, we’re doing 
it again. 
Pour water on each hand three times using a washing cup, covering the entire hand 
each time, from the wrist to the fingertips. This time, say a blessing:
 Everyone on their own:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ עַל נְטִילַת יָדָיִם:  בְּמִצְוֹ 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has made us holy with His 
mitzvahs, and commanded us concerning 
washing hands.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm ah-sher ki-
deh-shah-noo beh-mitz-voh-tahv veh-tzee-vah-noo ahl neh-tee-laht yah-dah-yim.
Now dry your hands and return to your seats. No conversation until the matzah’s been eaten.
Rachtzaרָחְצָה 
Wash Hands with a Blessing

=== Page 72 ===

RACHTZA • MOTZI • MATZAH
71
Pick up the matzahs—all three of them. Say the blessing that we always say on 
bread. (Matzah, after all, is also bread—just that it didn’t get a chance to rise.) 
 Everyone
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, הַמּוֹצִיא לֶחֶם 
מִן הָאָרֶץ: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who brings bread out of the earth.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm  
hah-moh-tzee leh-khehm min hah-ah-rehtz.
No, don’t eat it yet. That was the blessing on the bread. Now comes the blessing on 
the opportunity to do this mitzvah. 
Release the bottom matzah. Holding the top two matzahs, say this blessing:
 Everyone
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ 
בְּמִצְוֹתָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מַצָּה: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has made us holy with His 
mitzvahs, and commanded us concerning eating 
matzah.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm ah-sher  
ki-deh-shah-noo beh-mitz-voh-tahv veh-tzee-vah-noo ahl ah-khee-laht mah-tzah.
Now everyone leans to their left and eats matzah. 
Make sure to eat at least a quarter of a typical shmurah matzah, or half a machine matzah. If you are eating from 
your own Seder plate, with your own set of three matzahs, best to eat that amount twice—one portion from the 
middle matzah, one from the top matzah.
Motziמוֹצִיא 
Blessing on Matzah
Blessing on the Mitzvah
Matzahמַצָּה

=== Page 73 ===

72
After you’ve given everyone enough time for that totally awesome mitzvah-eating 
ceremony, we get yet another one. This time, however, you don’t lean.
IN THE TORAH, God tells Moses to tell us to eat the Passover offering with 
matzah and a bitter vegetable. That way, we will remember the bitterness of 
Egyptian persecution. 
Since it’s something God told us to do, that makes it a mitzvah. Since we 
don’t have a Passover offering these days, that makes it no longer a mitzvah. 
But since the sages of the Talmud instructed us to continue doing it none‑
theless, so it won’t be forgotten, that makes it a mitzvah again—a rabbinic 
mitzvah.
Because the Torah says to listen to the sages.
Everyone takes just over half an ounce (17 grams) of maror (or more if they want) and 
dips it in the charoset. Then, say this blessing:
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ עַל אֲכִילַת מָרוֹר:  בְּמִצְוֹ 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has made us holy with His 
mitzvahs, and commanded us concerning eating 
a bitter vegetable.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm ah-sher ki-
deh-shah-noo beh-mitz-voh-tahv veh-tzee-vah-noo ahl ah-khee-laht mah-rohr.
Don’t lean while you eat the maror.
Marorמָרוֹר 
Bitter Leaves for Eating

=== Page 74 ===

MAROR • KORECH
73
SOME PEOPLE THINK we do this because the Children of Israel packed 
sandwiches when they left Egypt. But that’s not so.
It all goes back to the period when the Second Temple was still in operation 
in Jerusalem. So they were still eating the Passover lamb offering.
A wise elder named Hillel, head of the Supreme Court at the time, deter‑
mined that the Passover meat, the matzah and the maror were all supposed 
to be eaten together, as a sandwich. The other sages disagreed, saying you 
could eat them separately. 
As often occurs between wise people, each side had a good point, and their 
disagreement was never resolved. So, to this day, we follow both opinions.
Which goes to show that two different opinions can both be right. Indeed, in 
a similar situation, a heavenly voice proclaimed, “Both are the words of the 
living God!”
Take some matzah from the bottom matzah, or somewhere else if there’s none left. 
Same amount as you used before—at least a quarter of a shmurah matzah or half a 
machine matzah.
Now dip some of those bitter chazeret greens in the charoset. Use the same amount 
you used last time. Place it together with your matzah in whatever sandwich-wrap 
fashion you like. 
(If you are careful about not getting matzah wet, dry off the chazeret first. Also, use 
dry charoset.)
Now say: 
 Everyone:
כֵּן
עָשָׂה הִלֵּל בִּזְמַן שֶׁבֵּית 
הַמִּקְדָּשׁ הָיָה קַיָּם, הָיָה כּוֹרֵךְ 
פֶּסַח מַצָּה וּמָרוֹר וְאוֹכֵל בְּיַחַד, כְּמוֹ 
שֶׁנֶּאֱמַר: עַל מַצּוֹת וּמְרוֹרִים יֹאכְלֻהוּ: 
THIS is what Hillel did in the time when the 
Temple was standing. 
He would wrap Pesach, Matzah and Maror and 
eat them together, just like it says, “On matzah 
and bitter herbs they will eat it.”
Now lean to your left and eat!
Bitter Leaves in a Wrapping
Korechכּוֹרֵךְ

=== Page 75 ===

74
Eat food!
You can also eat the egg from the Seder plate now, dipped in saltwater. No blessing 
on that.
Remember to leave room for more matzah at the end!
Try to get to the next step before midnight (at least on the first night of Passover). 
(Midnight is not necessarily 12 AM. Consult your local Jewish calendar for the time in 
your location.)
Remember the piece of matzah you broke off and put aside? Now that you’ve finished 
the meal, it’s time to make sure everyone gets a piece of that to eat. 
This matzah is in place of the Passover lamb, and that was always the last thing eaten 
in the meal.
You’ll need to supplement it with any other matzah lying around to make sure everyone 
eats at least one quarter of a typical shmurah matzah, or half a machine matzah. Even 
better if you can eat double that amount.
Eat the matzah you hid at the beginning of the Seder while leaning. Don’t eat 
anything else after this. 
After this, we don’t eat anything, so that we leave the Seder with the taste 
of matzah in our mouths.
Shulchan Orechשֻׁלְחָן עוֹרֵ 
A Festive Meal
Eat the Afikoman
Tzafunצָפוּן

=== Page 76 ===

SHULCHAN ORECH • TZAFUN • BEIRACH
75
Once everyone’s done with the matzah, it’s time to thank God for the food. Jews call 
this Birkat Hamazon, or “bentching.”
THE TORAH SAYS that when we “have eaten and are satiated” we should 
show some gratitude. We do that with four blessings—and there’s a history 
behind them: 
Moses provided the first blessing in gratitude for the manna that fell from 
heaven. Joshua composed a second blessing for the Land of Israel. King Da‑
vid composed the third for the city of Jerusalem, our eternal capital.
The fourth was added in Roman times, and is followed by a series of peti‑
tions that were added a bit later.
Pour the Third Cup
First, everyone fills their cup again with wine. This is the third cup, and we’ll be 
drinking it right after we finish Birkat Hamazon.
Some pour a special cup for Elijah the Prophet now. Others do that after Birkat 
Hamazon.
POURING THE THIRD CUP marks a major shift in the Seder. Until now, the 
Seder was principally about the past. Now we start moving to the future.
Like we explained at the beginning of the Seder, the four cups correspond to: 
Extract, Rescue, Liberate, Marry. So now we’re at the Liberate stage. 
The real liberation doesn’t totally kick in until the final Messianic Era, which 
will start with a public announcement from Elijah the Prophet. 
We want Elijah to feel at home when he comes in, so we pour a cup for him 
now (or before the fourth cup).
Thank God for the Meal
Beirachבֵּרַךְ

=== Page 77 ===

76
Preliminary Psalms 
These Psalms are an introduction to Birkat Hamazon. The actual blessings begin after this. 
 Everyone (you can read this quietly): 
שִׁיר 
הַמַּעֲלוֹת, בְּשׁוּב יְיָ 
אֶת שִׁיבַת צִיּוֹן, הָיִינוּ 
כְּחֹלְמִים: אָז יִמָּלֵא שְׂחוֹק 
פִּינוּ וּלְשׁוֹנֵנוּ רִנָּה, אָז יֹאמְרוּ בַגּוֹיִם, 
הִגְדִּיל יְיָ לַעֲשׂוֹת עִם אֵלֶּה: הִגְדִּיל יְיָ 
לַעֲשׂוֹת עִמָּנוּ, הָיִינוּ שְׂמֵחִים: שׁוּבָה יְיָ 
אֶת שְׁבִיתֵנוּ, כַּאֲפִיקִים בַּנֶּגֶב: הַזֹּרְעִים 
בְּדִמְעָה, בְּרִנָּה יִקְצֹרוּ: הָלוֹךְ יֵלֵךְ 
וּבָכֹה נֹשֵׂא מֶשֶׁךְ הַזָּרַע, בֹּא יָבֹא בְרִנָּה 
נֹשֵׂא אֲלֻמֹּתָיו: 
A Song for Rising Higher:
When God will begin to bring back the exiles 
of Zion (that’s us), we will discover we were like 
dreamers. 
Right away, our mouths will fill with laughter, our 
tongues with happy songs. 
Then the nations of the world will be so 
astonished, they will say, “God is doing great 
things for these people!” 
“True,” we will respond, “God is about to do some 
great things for us!” And we will start celebrating 
right away.
“Oh God!” we will say. “Bring our exiles home 
right away, like the rapid streams of a Negev 
rainstorm that suddenly transform it to moist, 
fertile soil!”
And He will respond, “Yes! Now that they’ve 
finished seeding, those who have sown with tears 
will reap the fruit of their planting with joyous 
song.”
“Those who journey up and down the fields of 
exile, weeping with their seeding tools, they will 
come back, come back with joyous song, carrying 
their sheaves.”

=== Page 78 ===

BEIRACH
77
לִבְנֵי 
קֹרַח מִזְמוֹר שִׁיר, 
יְסוּדָתוֹ בְּהַרְרֵי קֹדֶשׁ: 
אֹהֵב יְיָ שַׁעֲרֵי צִיּוֹן, מִכֹּל מִשְׁכְּנוֹת 
יַעֲקֹב: נִכְבָּדוֹת מְדֻבָּר בָּךְ, עִיר 
הָאֱלֹהִים סֶלָה: אַזְכִּיר רַהַב וּבָבֶל 
לְיֹדְעָי, הִנֵּה פְלֶשֶׁת וְצֹר עִם כּוּשׁ, זֶה 
יֻלַּד שָׁם: וּלְצִיּוֹן יֵאָמַר אִישׁ וְאִישׁ 
יֻלַּד בָּהּ, וְהוּא יְכוֹנְנֶהָ עֶלְיוֹן: יְיָ יִסְפֹּר 
בִּכְתוֹב עַמִּים, זֶה יֻלַּד שָׁם סֶלָה: 
וְשָׁרִים כְּחֹלְלִים, כֹּל מַעְיָנַי בָּךְ: 
A PSALM by the sons of Korach:
A song whose foundation is in the holy 
mountains.
God loves the gates of Zion more than all the 
dwelling places of Jacob. Glorious things are 
spoken of you, O city of God.
I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon unto 
those that know me; behold Philistia and Tyre, 
as well as Cush, “This one was born there.” But 
of Zion it will be said, “Each one of us was born 
there,” and He, the Most High, will establish it. 
God will count the register of the nations, “This 
one was born there.” Selah. Singers and dancers 
alike will chant, “ All my inner thoughts are of 
you.” 
אֲבָרְכָה 
אֶת יְיָ בְּכָל עֵת, 
תָּמִיד תְּהִלָּתוֹ 
בְּפִי: סוֹף דָּבָר הַכֹּל נִשְׁמָע, אֶת 
ֹתָיו שְׁמוֹר  הָאֱלֹהִים יְרָא וְאֶת מִצְו 
כִּי זֶה כָּל הָאָדָם: תְּהִלַּת יְיָ יְדַבֶּר פִּי 
וִיבָרֵךְ כָּל בָּשָׂר שֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ לְעוֹלָם 
וָעֶד: וַאֲנַחְנוּ נְבָרֵךְ יָהּ מֵעַתָּה וְעַד 
עוֹלָם הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
I WILL BLESS God at all times; His praise is 
always in my mouth. The ultimate conclusion, all 
having been heard: Be in awe of God and observe 
His mitzvahs, for this is what we are all about. My 
mouth will utter the praise of God, and all living 
creatures shall bless His holy Name infinitely. 
And we will bless God from now and forever; 
Halleluyah! 
 At this point we wash the tips of our fingers, at the table, with just a small amount of water. 
Before washing your fingertips, say: 
זֶה 
חֵלֶק אָדָם רָשָׁע מֵאֱלֹהִים 
וְנַחֲלַת אִמְרוֹ מֵאֵל: 
THIS is the wicked man’s portion from God, and 
the lot assigned to him by God.
Wash your fingertips, then say:
וַיְדַבֵּר 
אֵלַי זֶה הַשֻּׁלְחָן אֲשֶׁר 
לִפְנֵי יְיָ: 
HE said to me, 
“This is the table before God.”

=== Page 79 ===

78
Hold your cup until the conclusion of blessing three. 
When there are three or more males ages 13 or older, continue with the Zimun, otherwise, continue on next page. 
Zimun
The leader begins: Leader:
רַבּוֹתַי מִיר ווֶעלִין בֶּענְטְשִׁין EVERYONE, let’s bentch!
Rah-boi-sai meer veh-lehn behn-tchehn
The others respond: Everyone/Leader:
 יְהִי שֵׁם יְיָ מְבֹרָךְ 
מֵעַתָּה וְעַד עוֹלָם: 
MAY the Name of God be blessed  
from now and forever.
Yeh-hee shaym ah-doh-noi meh-voh-rahkh may-ah-tah veh-ahd oh-lahm!
The leader repeats the response. Then he continues:
(If there are 10 or more males over age 13, add the words in parentheses): Leader:
בִּרְשׁוּת מָרָנָן וְרַבָּנָן וְרַבּוֹתַי נְבָרֵךְ 
(אֱלֹהֵינוּ) שֶׁאָכַלְנוּ מִשֶּׁלּוֹ: 
WITH your permission, masters, teachers and 
esteemed company, 
Let us bless Him (our God) of whose bounty we 
have eaten.
Bir-shoot mah-rah-nahn veh-rah-bah-nahn veh-rah-boh-tai. Neh-vah-raykh  
(eh-loh-hay-noo) sheh-ah-khal-noo mee-sheh-loh!
The others respond: Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ (אֱלֹהֵינוּ) שֶׁאָכַלְנוּ מִשֶּׁלּוֹ וּבְטוּבוֹ 
חָיִינוּ:
BLESSED be He (our God) of whose bounty we 
have eaten and by whose goodness we live.
Bah-rookh (eh-loh-hay-noo) sheh-ah-khal-noo 
mee-sheh-loh oo-veh-too-voh khah-yee-noo!
The leader responds: Leader:
בָּרוּךְ (אֱלֹהֵינוּ) שֶׁאָכַלְנוּ מִשֶּׁלּוֹ וּבְטוּבוֹ 
חָיִינוּ:
BLESSED be He (our God) of whose bounty we 
have eaten and by whose goodness we live.
 Bah-rookh (eh-loh-hay-noo) sheh-ah-khal-noo  
mee-sheh-loh oo-veh-too-voh khah-yee-noo!

=== Page 80 ===

BEIRACH
79
ברכת המזון
Blessing After the Meal
Blessing One
Now, everyone says together (better: sings together):
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
מֶלֶךְ הָעוֹלָם, הַזָּן 
אֶת הָעוֹלָם כֻּלּוֹ בְּטוּבוֹ בְּחֵן בְּחֶסֶד 
וּבְרַחֲמִים הוּא נוֹתֵן לֶחֶם לְכָל בָּשָׂר 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: וּבְטוּבוֹ הַגָּדוֹל עִמָּנוּ 
תָּמִיד לֹא חָסֵר לָנוּ וְאַל יֶחְסַר לָנוּ 
מָזוֹן לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד: בַּעֲבוּר שְׁמוֹ הַגָּדוֹל 
כִּי הוּא אֵל זָן וּמְפַרְנֵס לַכֹּל וּמֵטִיב 
לַכֹּל וּמֵכִין מָזוֹן לְכָל בְּרִיּוֹתָיו אֲשֶׁר 
בָּרָא, כָּאָמוּר: פּוֹתֵחַ אֶת יָדֶךָ וּמַשְׂבִּיעַ 
לְכָל חַי רָצוֹן: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, הַזָּן אֶת 
הַכֹּל: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who, in His goodness, feeds the whole 
world with grace, with kindness and with mercy. 
He gives food to all living creatures, because His 
loving-kindness is infinite. Through His great 
goodness to us we never lack food, and may we 
never lack it, for the sake of His good reputation. 
For He is a kind God who feeds and sustains all, 
does good to all, and prepares food for all His 
creatures whom He has created, as it is said: You 
open Your hand and satisfy the desire of every 
living thing. Blessed are You, God, who provides 
food for all.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh hah-oh-lahm
hah-zahn eht hah-oh-lahm koo-loh beh-too-voh beh-khayn  
beh-kheh-sehd oo-veh-rah-khah-meem
hoo noh-tayn leh-khehm leh-khohl bah-sahr kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh.
Oov-too-voh hah-gah-dohl ee-mah-noo tah-meed loh khah-sayr lah-noo
Veh-ahl yekh-sahr lah-noo mah-zohn leh-oh-lahm vah-ehd
Bah-ah-voor sheh-moh hah-gah-dohl kee hoo ayl zahn oo-meh-fahr-nays lah-kohl
oo-may-teev lah-kohl oo-may-kheen mah-zohn leh-khol beh-ree-yoh-tahv 
ah-shehr bah-rah, kah-ah-moor poh-tay-ahkh eht yah-deh-khah oo-mahs-bee-ah 
leh-khohl khai rah-tzohn, bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi hah-zahn et hah-kohl.

=== Page 81 ===

80
Blessing Two
נוֹדֶה 
לְּךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ עַל 
שֶׁהִנְחַלְתָּ לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ 
אֶרֶץ חֶמְדָּה טוֹבָה וּרְחָבָה וְעַל 
שֶׁהוֹצֵאתָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֵאֶרֶץ מִצְרַיִם 
וּפְדִיתָנוּ מִבֵּית עֲבָדִים וְעַל בְּרִיתְךָ 
שֶׁחָתַמְתָּ בִּבְשָׂרֵנוּ וְעַל תּוֹרָתְךָ 
שֶׁלִּמַּדְתָּנוּ וְעַל חֻקֶּיךָ שֶׁהוֹדַעְתָּנוּ וְעַל 
חַיִּים חֵן וָחֶסֶד שֶׁחוֹנַנְתָּנוּ וְעַל אֲכִילַת 
מָזוֹן שָׁאַתָּה זָן וּמְפַרְנֵס אוֹתָנוּ תָּמִיד 
בְּכָל יוֹם וּבְכָל עֵת וּבְכָל שָׁעָה: 
WE thank You, God, our God, for having given a 
heritage to our fathers of a precious, good and 
spacious land; for having brought us out, God 
our God, out of the land of Egypt and liberating 
us from slavery; for Your covenant that You have 
sealed in our flesh; for Your Torah which You have 
taught us; for Your statutes which You have told 
us; for the life, favor and loving-kindness which 
You have graciously bestowed upon us; and 
for our capacity to eat the food You constantly 
provide and sustain us with every day, at all times, 
and at every hour. 
וְעַל 
הַכֹּל יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ אֲנַחְנוּ 
מוֹדִים לָךְ וּמְבָרְכִים אוֹתָךְ 
יִתְבָּרֵךְ שִׁמְךָ בְּפִי כָּל חַי תָּמִיד לְעוֹלָם 
וָעֶד, כַּכָּתוּב: וְאָכַלְתָּ וְשָׂבָעְתָּ וּבֵרַכְתָּ 
אֶת יְיָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ עַל הָאָרֶץ הַטֹּבָה אֲשֶׁר 
נָתַן לָךְ: בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, עַל הָאָרֶץ וְעַל 
הַמָּזוֹן: 
FOR all this, God our God, we thank You and 
bless You. May Your reputation be blessed by 
the mouth of every living being, constantly and 
forever. As it is written: When you have eaten and 
are satiated, you shall bless God your God for the 
good land which He has given you. Blessed are 
You, God, for the land and for the food. 
Blessing Three
רַחֵם 
יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ עַל יִשְׂרָאֵל 
עַמֶּךָ וְעַל יְרוּשָׁלַיִם עִירֶךָ 
וְעַל צִיּוֹן מִשְׁכַּן כְּבוֹדֶךָ וְעַל מַלְכוּת 
בֵּית דָּוִד מְשִׁיחֶךָ וְעַל הַבַּיִת הַגָּדוֹל 
וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ שֶׁנִּקְרָא שִׁמְךָ עָלָיו: אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
אָבִינוּ רוֹעֵנוּ זוֹנֵנוּ פַּרְנְסֵנוּ וְכַלְכְּלֵנוּ 
וְהַרְוִיחֵנוּ וְהַרְוַח לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ מְהֵרָה 
מִכָּל צָרוֹתֵינוּ: וְנָא אַל תַּצְרִיכֵנוּ יְיָ 
אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לֹא לִידֵי מַתְּנַת בָּשָׂר וָדָם 
וְלֹא לִידֵי הַלְוָאָתָם כִּי אִם לְיָדְךָ 
הַמְּלֵאָה הַפְּתוּחָה הַקְּדוֹשָׁה וְהָרְחָבָה 
שֶׁלֹּא נֵבוֹשׁ וְלֹא נִכָּלֵם לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד: 
HAVE mercy, God our God, on Israel Your people, 
on Jerusalem Your city, on Zion the abode of 
Your glory, on the rule of the house of David 
Your anointed, and on the great and holy Temple 
which is called by Your Name. 
Our God, our father, our shepherd, feed us, 
sustain us, nourish us and give us comfort; and 
speedily, God our God, grant us relief from all our 
afflictions. 
God, our God, please do not make us dependent 
upon the gifts of mortal men nor upon their 
loans, but only upon Your full, open, holy and 
generous hand, that we may not be shamed or 
disgraced forever and ever.

=== Page 82 ===

BEIRACH
81
If it’s Friday night, add the following in honor of Shabbat:
רְצֵה 
וְהַחֲלִיצֵנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
תֶיךָ וּבְמִצְוַת יוֹם  בְּמִצְוֹ 
הַשְּׁבִיעִי הַשַּׁבָּת הַגָּדוֹל וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ הַזֶּה 
כִּי יוֹם זֶה גָּדוֹל וְקָדוֹשׁ הוּא לְפָנֶיךָ, 
לִשְׁבָּת בּוֹ וְלָנוּחַ בּוֹ בְּאַהֲבָה כְּמִצְוַת 
רְצוֹנֶךָ, וּבִרְצוֹנְךָ הָנִיחַ לָנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
שֶׁלֹּא תְהֵא צָרָה וְיָגוֹן וַאֲנָחָה בְּיוֹם 
מְנוּחָתֵנוּ, וְהַרְאֵנוּ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ בְּנֶחָמַת 
צִיּוֹן עִירֶךָ, וּבְבִנְיַן יְרוּשָׁלַיִם עִיר 
קָדְשֶׁךָ, כִּי אַתָּה הוּא בַּעַל הַיְשׁוּעוֹת 
וּבַעַל הַנֶּחָמוֹת: 
MAY it please You, God, our God, to strengthen us 
through Your commandments, and through the 
mitzvah of the Seventh Day, this great and holy 
Shabbat. For this day is great and holy before You, 
a day to refrain from work and a day when we rest 
with love, in accordance with the mitzvah You 
desire. So you should also want, God, our God, to 
let us have tranquility, so that there shall be no 
trouble, sadness or grief on the day of our rest. 
God, our God, let us see the consolation of Zion 
Your city, and the rebuilding of Jerusalem Your 
holy city, for You are the Master of liberations and 
the Master of consolations.
אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
וֵאלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, 
יַעֲלֶה וְיָבוֹא וְיַגִּיעַ, 
וְיֵרָאֶה וְיֵרָצֶה וְיִשָּׁמַע, וְיִפָּקֵד וְיִזָּכֵר 
זִכְרוֹנֵנוּ וּפִקְּדוֹנֵנוּ, וְזִכְרוֹן אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, 
וְזִכְרוֹן מָשִׁיחַ בֶּן דָּוִד עַבְדֶּךָ, וְזִכְרוֹן 
יְרוּשָׁלַיִם עִיר קָדְשֶׁךָ, וְזִכְרוֹן כָּל עַמְּךָ 
בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל לְפָנֶיךָ, לִפְלֵיטָה לְטוֹבָה, 
לְחֵן וּלְחֶסֶד וּלְרַחֲמִים וּלְחַיִּים טוֹבִים 
וּלְשָׁלוֹם, בְּיוֹם חַג הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה, 
בְּיוֹם טוֹב מִקְרָא קֹדֶשׁ הַזֶּה, זָכְרֵנוּ יְיָ 
אֱלֹהֵינוּ בּוֹ לְטוֹבָה (אָמֵן), וּפָקְדֵנוּ בוֹ 
לִבְרָכָה (אָמֵן), וְהוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ בוֹ לְחַיִּים 
טוֹבִים (אָמֵן), וּבִדְבַר יְשׁוּעָה וְרַחֲמִים, 
חוּס וְחָנֵּנוּ, וְרַחֵם עָלֵינוּ וְהוֹשִׁיעֵנוּ, כִּי 
אֵלֶיךָ עֵינֵינוּ, כִּי אֵל מֶלֶךְ חַנּוּן וְרַחוּם 
אָתָּה: 
OUR God and God of our fathers, may there 
ascend, come and reach, be seen and accepted, 
heard, recalled and remembered before You, 
the remembrance and recollection of us, the 
remembrance of our fathers, the remembrance 
of Moshiach the son of David Your servant, the 
remembrance of Jerusalem Your holy city, and 
the remembrance of all Your people the House of 
Israel, for deliverance, wellbeing, grace, loving-
kindness, mercy, good life and peace, on this 
day of the Festival of Matzot, on this day that is 
considered holy. Remember us on this day, God 
our God, for good (Amen); recollect us on this day 
for blessing (Amen); help us on this day for good 
life (Amen). With the promise of deliverance and 
compassion, spare us and be gracious to us; have 
compassion for us and deliver us; for our eyes are 
directed to You, for You, God, are a gracious and 
merciful king.
וּבְנֵה 
יְרוּשָׁלַיִם עִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ 
בִּמְהֵרָה בְיָמֵינוּ. בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, בֹּנֵה בְרַחֲמָיו יְרוּשָׁלָיִם. אָמֵן: 
AND rebuild Jerusalem the holy city speedily in 
our days. Blessed are You, God, who in His mercy 
rebuilds Jerusalem. Amen.
You may put your cup down.

=== Page 83 ===

82
Blessing Four
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, הָאֵל, אָבִינוּ 
מַלְכֵּנוּ, אַדִּירֵנוּ בּוֹרְאֵנוּ גּוֹאֲלֵנוּ 
יוֹצְרֵנוּ, קְדוֹשֵׁנוּ קְדוֹשׁ יַעֲקֹב, רוֹעֵנוּ 
רוֹעֵה יִשְׂרָאֵל הַמֶּלֶךְ הַטּוֹב וְהַמֵּטִיב 
לַכֹּל בְּכָל יוֹם וָיוֹם, הוּא הֵטִיב לָנוּ, 
הוּא מֵטִיב לָנוּ, הוּא יֵיטִיב לָנוּ, 
הוּא גְמָלָנוּ הוּא גוֹמְלֵנוּ הוּא יִגְמְלֵנוּ 
לָעַד, לְחֵן וּלְחֶסֶד וּלְרַחֲמִים, וּלְרֶוַח 
הַצָּלָה וְהַצְלָחָה, בְּרָכָה וִישׁוּעָה, 
נֶחָמָה פַּרְנָסָה וְכַלְכָּלָה וְרַחֲמִים וְחַיִּים 
וְשָׁלוֹם וְכָל טוֹב וּמִכָּל טוּב לְעוֹלָם אַל 
יְחַסְּרֵנוּ: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, good God, our Father, our King, our 
Might, our Creator, our Liberator, our Maker, our 
Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, our Shepherd, 
the Shepherd of Israel, the King who is good and 
does good to all, each and every day. 
He has done good for us, He does good for us, 
and He will do good for us; He has treated us, 
He continues treating us, and He will forever 
treat us with grace, loving-kindness and mercy, 
relief, rescue and success, blessing and help, 
consolation, sustenance and nourishment, 
compassion, life, peace and all goodness; and may 
He never cause us to lack any good.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִמְלוֹךְ עָלֵינוּ לְעוֹלָם 
וָעֶד: 
May the Compassionate One reign over us forever 
and ever.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִתְבָּרֵךְ בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ May the Compassionate One be blessed in heaven 
and on earth.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִשְׁתַּבַּח לְדוֹר דּוֹרִים 
וְיִתְפָּאֵר בָּנוּ לָעַד וּלְנֵצַח נְצָחִים 
וְיִתְהַדַּר בָּנוּ לָעַד וּלְעוֹלְמֵי עוֹלָמִים: 
May the Compassionate One be praised for all 
generations, and be glorified in us forever and all 
eternity, and honored in us forever and ever.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יְפַרְנְסֵנוּ בְּכָבוֹד May the Compassionate One sustain us with 
honor.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִשְׁבּוֹר עוֹל גָּלוּת מֵעַל 
צַוָּארֵנוּ וְהוּא יוֹלִיכֵנוּ קוֹמְמִיּוּת 
לְאַרְצֵנוּ: 
May the Compassionate One break the yoke of 
exile from our neck, and may He lead us upright 
to our land.
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִשְׁלַח בְּרָכָה מְרֻבָּה בְּבַיִת 
זֶה וְעַל שֻׁלְחָן זֶה שֶׁאָכַלְנוּ עָלָיו: 
May the Compassionate One send abundant 
blessing into this house and upon this table at 
which we have eaten.

=== Page 84 ===

BEIRACH
83
הָרַחֲמָן הוּא יִשְׁלַח לָנוּ אֶת אֵלִיָּהוּ 
הַנָּבִיא זָכוּר לַטּוֹב וִיבַשֶּׂר לָנוּ 
בְּשׂוֹרוֹת טוֹבוֹת יְשׁוּעוֹת וְנֶחָמוֹת: 
May the Compassionate One send us Elijah the 
Prophet, may he be remembered for good, and 
may he bring us good tidings, salvation and 
consolation.
הָרַחֲמָן 
הוּא יְבָרֵךְ אֶת 
אָבִי מוֹרִי בַּעַל 
הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה וְאֶת אִמִּי מוֹרָתִי בַּעְלַת 
הַבַּיִת הַזֶּה אוֹתָם וְאֶת בֵּיתָם וְאֶת 
זַרְעָם וְאֶת כָּל אֲשֶׁר לָהֶם אוֹתָנוּ 
וְאֶת כָּל אֲשֶׁר לָנוּ: כְּמוֹ שֶׁבֵּרַךְ אֶת 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ אַבְרָהָם יִצְחָק וְיַעֲקֹב בַּכֹּל 
מִכֹּל כֹּל, כֵּן יְבָרֵךְ אוֹתָנוּ (בְּנֵי בְרִית) 
כֻּלָּנוּ יַחַד בִּבְרָכָה שְׁלֵמָה וְנֹאמַר 
אָמֵן: 
MAY the Compassionate One bless my father, my 
teacher, the master of this house, and my mother, 
my teacher, the mistress of this house; them, 
their household, their children, and all that is 
theirs; us, and all that is ours. Just as He blessed 
our forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, “in 
everything,” “from everything,” “with everything,” 
so may He bless all of us (the children of the 
Covenant) together with a perfect blessing, and 
let us say, Amen.
מִמָּרוֹם 
יְלַמְּדוּ עָלָיו 
וְעָלֵינוּ זְכוּת 
שֶׁתְּהֵא לְמִשְׁמֶרֶת שָׁלוֹם וְנִשָּׂא בְרָכָה 
מֵאֵת יְיָ וּצְדָקָה מֵאֱלֹהֵי יִשְׁעֵנוּ 
וְנִמְצָא חֵן וְשֵׂכֶל טוֹב בְּעֵינֵי אֱלֹהִים 
וְאָדָם: 
FROM On High, may there be invoked upon 
him and upon us such merit as will bring a 
safeguarding of peace. May we receive blessing 
from God, and just loving-kindness from the God 
who rescues us, and may we find grace and good 
understanding in the eyes of God and man. 
If it’s Friday night, add the following in honor of Shabbat:
הָרַחֲמָן 
הוּא יַנְחִילֵנוּ 
לְיוֹם שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ שַׁבָּת 
וּמְנוּחָה לְחַיֵּי הָעוֹלָמִים: 
MAY the Compassionate One give us our heritage 
of a day that is entirely Shabbat and rest for 
eternal life.
הָרַחֲמָן 
הוּא יַנְחִילֵנוּ לְיוֹם 
שֶׁכֻּלּוֹ טוֹב: 
MAY the Compassionate One give us our heritage 
of a day which is all good.
הָרַחֲמָן 
הוּא יְזַכֵּנוּ לִימוֹת 
הַמָּשִׁיחַ וּלְחַיֵּי 
הָעוֹלָם הַבָּא. 
MAY the Compassionate One privilege us with 
the days of Moshiach and the life of the World to 
Come.

=== Page 85 ===

84
מִגְדֹּל 
יְשׁוּעוֹת מַלְכּוֹ וְעֹשֶׂה 
חֶסֶד לִמְשִׁיחוֹ לְדָוִד 
וּלְזַרְעוֹ עַד עוֹלָם: עֹשֶׂה שָׁלוֹם 
בִּמְרוֹמָיו הוּא יַעֲשֶׂה שָׁלוֹם עָלֵינוּ וְעַל 
כָּל יִשְׂרָאֵל וְאִמְרוּ אָמֵן: 
HE is a tower of salvation to His king, and 
bestows loving-kindness upon His anointed, to 
David and his descendants forever. 
He who makes peace in His heights, may He make 
peace for us and for all Israel; and say, Amen.
יְראוּ
אֶת יְיָ קְדֹשָׁיו, כִּי אֵין 
מַחְסוֹר לִירֵאָיו: כְּפִירִים 
רָשׁוּ וְרָעֵבוּ, וְדֹרְשֵׁי יְיָ לֹא יַחְסְרוּ כָל 
טוֹב: הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: פּוֹתֵחַ אֶת יָדֶךָ, וּמַשְׂבִּיעַ לְכָל 
חַי רָצוֹן: בָּרוּךְ הַגֶּבֶר אֲשֶׁר יִבְטַח בַּייָ, 
וְהָיָה יְיָ מִבְטַחוֹ: 
BE in awe of God, you His holy ones, for those 
who are in awe of Him suffer no want. Young 
lions are in need and go hungry, but those who 
seek God shall not lack any good. 
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because His 
loving-kindness is infinite. 
You open Your hand and satisfy the desire of 
every living thing. 
Blessed is the man who trusts in God, and God 
will be his trust.
Drink the Third Cup of Wine
Hold the cup and say the blessing on the third cup of wine:
 Everyone:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי 
הַגָּפֶן: 
BLESSED are You, God our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine. 
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
Now lean to the left and drink your entire third cup of wine—or at least most of it.

=== Page 86 ===

BEIRACH
85
Pour the Fourth Cup of Wine
Now it’s time to pour the fourth cup, over which we will sing songs praising God for His wonders. 
Pour the fourth cup, and if you haven’t yet done so, pour a cup for Elijah the 
Prophet. Then we send someone to open all the doors leading from the dining table 
to the outside, so that Elijah can enter and announce that Moshiach is on his way. 
When it’s not Friday night, many have the custom of taking along a lit candle from 
the table.
EVERYTHING WE DO on the night of the Seder is a reflection of what God 
Himself is up to on this night. We open all the doors from our place at the 
table until the outside door of our home because that is what is happening 
above. 
For every prayer, heaven has many doors, each requiring another pass be‑
fore it will open to you. Why do you deserve an answer to this prayer? What 
have you been doing with your life until now? When others asked for help, 
did you help them?
But on the two nights of Passover, all the doors are left wide open. Regard‑
less of who you are, where you are standing, or even what you were doing a 
moment ago, tonight you can leap upwards to the highest heights. 
Ask for whatever burns inside your heart to be asked. Think big. Think way 
up there. And yet higher.44
שְׁפוֹךְ 
חֲמָתְךָ אֶל הַגּוֹיִם 
אֲשֶׁר לֹא יְדָעוּךָ, וְעַל 
מַמְלָכוֹת אֲשֶׁר בְּשִׁמְךָ לֹא קָרָאוּ: כִּי 
אָכַל אֶת יַעֲקֹב, וְאֶת נָוֵהוּ הֵשַׁמּוּ: 
שְׁפָךְ עֲלֵיהֶם זַעְמֶךָ וַחֲרוֹן אַפְּךָ 
 יַשִּׂיגֵם: תִּרְדּוֹף בְּאַף וְתַשְׁמִידֵם מִתַּחַת 
שְׁמֵי יְיָ: 
POUR out Your wrath upon those nations that do 
not acknowledge You, 
and upon the kingdoms that have never called 
upon Your Name. 
For they have devoured Jacob and laid waste to 
his home. 
Pour out Your wrath upon them, and let the 
wrath of Your anger overtake them. 
Pursue them with anger, and destroy them from 
beneath the heavens of God.
To this day, there remain despots and masters of terror who connive every 
means they can to destroy us. These words are meant not only for them, but 
for all the forces of darkness and destruction, physical and spiritual, that 
plague us. Their elimination will be the greatest healing and liberation for 
this beautiful world that God has made.
You can now close whatever doors you opened. Wait for everyone to get back to the 
table before going on.

=== Page 87 ===

86
The Hallel continues where we left off before the meal. It’s a lot of fun if you know all the songs and sing them in 
Hebrew. If you don’t know that, try to read it out loud in English. Make sure to say the last blessing, and drink the 
fourth and last cup of wine. 
HALLEL IS A SECTION of the Psalms that were selected to be recited and 
sung together on those occasions when God really deserves some special 
recognition—as in when He has made miracles for us. 
We already said Hallel in our prayers before the Seder on this night. But now 
we’re saying it as part of the Seder. 
We already said the first lines of Hallel just before we drank the second cup 
of wine. Those lines were about the Exodus from Egypt. Now we say the 
rest—which are about the upcoming liberation brought to us by Moshiach 
real soon. 
We begin by explaining to God why He has to get this done real soon—be‑
cause the current situation is real bad for His reputation. We continue by 
celebrating and praising Him for liberating us, because we’re super‑ 
c
onfident that He has accepted our plea and Moshiach is on his way. 
לֹא
לָנוּ יְיָ, לֹא לָנוּ, כִּי לְשִׁמְךָ תֵּן 
כָּבוֹד, עַל חַסְדְּךָ עַל אֲמִתֶּךָ: 
לָמָּה יֹאמְרוּ הַגּוֹיִם, אַיֵּה נָא אֱלֹהֵיהֶם: 
וֵאלֹהֵינוּ בַשָּׁמָיִם, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר חָפֵץ עָשָׂה: 
עֲצַבֵּיהֶם כֶּסֶף וְזָהָב, מַעֲשֵׂה יְדֵי אָדָם: 
פֶּה לָהֶם וְלֹא יְדַבֵּרוּ, עֵינַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא 
יִרְאוּ: אָזְנַיִם לָהֶם וְלֹא יִשְׁמָעוּ, אַף 
לָהֶם וְלֹא יְרִיחוּן: יְדֵיהֶם וְלֹא יְמִישׁוּן, 
רַגְלֵיהֶם וְלֹא יְהַלֵּכוּ, לֹא יֶהְגּוּ בִּגְרוֹנָם: 
DON’T do it for us, God! Not for us, but to give 
some honor to Your own name! For the sake of 
Your reputation for loving-kindness and being 
true to Your word! 
Why should the nations say, “Where, now, is their 
God?” 
Our God is in heaven; anything He desires, He 
makes it happen. 
Their idols are of silver and gold, fabrications of 
human hands: 
they have mouths, but cannot speak; 
they have eyes, but cannot see; 
they have ears, but cannot hear; 
they have a nose, but cannot smell; 
their hands cannot feel; their feet cannot walk; 
no sound comes out of their throat. 
Praise God for His Wonders!
Hallel Nirtzahהַלֵּל נִרְצָה

=== Page 88 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
87
כְּמוֹהֶם יִהְיוּ עֹשֵׂיהֶם, כֹּל אֲשֶׁר בֹּטֵחַ 
בָּהֶם: יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּטַח בַּייָ, עֶזְרָם וּמָגִנָּם 
הוּא: בֵּית אַהֲרֹן בִּטְחוּ בַייָ, עֶזְרָם 
וּמָגִנָּם הוּא: יִרְאֵי יְיָ בִּטְחוּ בַייָ, עֶזְרָם 
וּמָגִנָּם הוּא: יְיָ זְכָרָנוּ יְבָרֵךְ, יְבָרֵךְ אֶת 
בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, יְבָרֵךְ אֶת בֵּית אַהֲרֹן: 
יְבָרֵךְ יִרְאֵי יְיָ, הַקְּטַנִּים עִם הַגְּדֹלִים: 
יֹסֵף יְיָ עֲלֵיכֶם, עֲלֵיכֶם וְעַל בְּנֵיכֶם: 
בְּרוּכִים אַתֶּם לַייָ, עֹשֵׂה שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ:  
הַשָּׁמַיִם שָׁמַיִם לַייָ, וְהָאָרֶץ נָתַן לִבְנֵי 
אָדָם: לֹא הַמֵּתִים יְהַלְלוּ יָהּ, וְלֹא כָּל 
יֹרְדֵי דוּמָה: וַאֲנַחְנוּ נְבָרֵךְ יָהּ, מֵעַתָּה 
וְעַד עוֹלָם, הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
Those who produce them will end up like them, 
everyone that trusts in them.
But Israel, trust in God! He is their help and their 
shield. 
House of Aaron, trust in God! He is their help and 
their shield. 
All human beings who are in awe of God, trust in 
God! He is their help and their shield.    
God, who is always mindful of us, will bless us.
He will bless the House of Israel; He will bless the 
House of Aaron; 
He will bless all people who are in awe of God, the 
small ones along with the big ones. 
May God give you more and more blessings, 
blessings for you and for your children!
You should be blessed over and over again by 
God, the Maker of heaven and earth.
The heavens are the heavens of God, but as for 
the earth, He assigned some responsibility to 
human beings. 
The dead aren’t going to cheer for God, all those 
that go down into the silence of the grave. 
But we will bless God, from now to eternity. 
Halleluyah! Praise God!
“THOSE WHO ARE IN AWE OF GOD”—that’s a reference to the righteous 
among the nations. According to Jewish tradition, you don’t have to be Jew‑
ish to have a share in the World to Come. You just have to be righteous and 
keep the basic laws of humanity, as given to Adam and Noah by the Creator. 
The times of Moshiach and the final exodus isn’t just a liberation and home‑
coming for all the Jews. At that time, the entire world, every individual and 
every creature, will attain its fulfillment.
Like Maimonides writes, the entire occupation of the world will be just to 
know the divine wisdom. Everything that exists now will exist then, but our 
minds will be open to the awe and wonder of it all, and everyone will sing 
praises.

=== Page 89 ===

88
אָהַבְתִּי 
כִּי יִשְׁמַע יְיָ אֶת 
קוֹלִי תַּחֲנוּנָי: 
כִּי הִטָּה אָזְנוֹ לִי, וּבְיָמַי אֶקְרָא: 
אֲפָפוּנִי חֶבְלֵי מָוֶת, וּמְצָרֵי שְׁאוֹל 
מְצָאוּנִי, צָרָה וְיָגוֹן אֶמְצָא: וּבְשֵׁם יְיָ 
אֶקְרָא, אָנָּה יְיָ מַלְּטָה נַפְשִׁי: חַנּוּן יְיָ 
וְצַדִּיק, וֵאלֹהֵינוּ מְרַחֵם: שֹׁמֵר פְּתָאיִם 
יְיָ, דַּלֹּתִי וְלִי יְהוֹשִׁיעַ: שׁוּבִי נַפְשִׁי 
לִמְנוּחָיְכִי, כִּי יְיָ גָּמַל עָלָיְכִי: כִּי חִלַּצְתָּ 
נַפְשִׁי מִמָּוֶת, אֶת עֵינִי מִן דִּמְעָה, 
אֶת רַגְלִי מִדֶּחִי: אֶתְהַלֵּךְ לִפְנֵי יְיָ, 
בְּאַרְצוֹת הַחַיִּים: הֶאֱמַנְתִּי כִּי אֲדַבֵּר, 
אֲנִי עָנִיתִי מְאֹד: אֲנִי אָמַרְתִּי בְחָפְזִי, 
כָּל הָאָדָם כֹּזֵב: 
מָה 
אָשִׁיב לַייָ, כָּל תַּגְמוּלוֹהִי 
עָלָי: כּוֹס יְשׁוּעוֹת אֶשָּׂא, 
וּבְשֵׁם יְיָ אֶקְרָא: נְדָרַי לַייָ אֲשַׁלֵּם, 
נֶגְדָה נָּא לְכָל עַמּוֹ: יָקָר בְּעֵינֵי יְיָ, 
הַמָּוְתָה לַחֲסִידָיו: אָנָּה יְיָ כִּי אֲנִי 
עַבְדֶּךָ, אֲנִי עַבְדְּךָ בֶּן אֲמָתֶךָ, פִּתַּחְתָּ 
לְמוֹסֵרָי: לְךָ אֶזְבַּח זֶבַח תּוֹדָה, וּבְשֵׁם 
יְיָ אֶקְרָא: נְדָרַי לַייָ אֲשַׁלֵּם, נֶגְדָה נָּא 
לְכָל עַמּוֹ: בְּחַצְרוֹת בֵּית יְיָ, בְּתוֹכֵכִי 
יְרוּשָׁלָיִם, הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
I LOVE GOD, because He hears my voice, my 
prayers.
He pays attention to me any day I call. The pangs 
of death might encompass me, and the agonies of 
the grave catch up with me. 
I could face trouble and sorrow, and I would call 
upon the Name of God, saying, “Please, God, get 
me out of this!” 
God is gracious and just. Our God is 
compassionate. God watches over simple people 
(like me). I was really down, and He got me out of 
there. My soul, you can rest again, for God dealt 
kindly with you.
For You have delivered my soul from death, my 
eyes from tears, my foot from stumbling. I will 
walk before God in the lands of the living. Even 
when I said, “I am so down and out!”
—really, I still had faith. When I said, “ All people 
are deceitful,” I was just being too hasty.
WHAT can I repay God for all His kindness to me? 
I will raise a cup to all the times You rescued me 
and call upon the name of God.
I will pay my vows to God in the presence of all 
His people. 
God takes the death of His pious ones very 
seriously. 
I thank you, God, for I am Your servant. 
I am Your servant, the son of Your handmaid; You 
have loosened my bonds.
To You I will bring an offering of thanksgiving, 
and I will call upon the name of God. 
I will pay my vows to God in the presence of all His 
people, in the courtyards of the House of God, in 
the midst of Jerusalem. Halleluyah! Praise God!

=== Page 90 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
89
THE TALMUD TELLS: There will come a day when Egypt will bring a gift for 
Moshiach. They’ll figure he probably won’t accept it from them. But the Holy 
One, may He be blessed, will say, “ Accept it from them! They were hosts to 
My children in Egypt.”
When the other nations see that the Egyptian offering was accepted, they 
will say, “For sure, ours will be as well!” And they’ll all start bringing gifts, 
and praising their Creator as well.
Which teaches us that people do good things and bad things. For the bad 
things, they’ll get their just deserts. For the good things, you should show 
your appreciation. It pays off.45
הַלְלוּ 
אֶת יְיָ כָּל גּוֹיִם, 
שַׁבְּחוּהוּ כָּל הָאֻמִּים: 
כִּי גָבַר עָלֵינוּ חַסְדּוֹ, וֶאֱמֶת יְיָ לְעוֹלָם, 
הַלְלוּיָהּ: 
CHEER God, all you nations!
Praise Him, all you peoples!
All the more so, we should thank Him, because 
His kindness went way over the top for us, and 
the truth of God is infinite.
Halleluyah!

=== Page 91 ===

90
If you have three or more people, one person leads and the others respond. 
Otherwise, just say the lines labeled “Others.”
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמַר נָא יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמַר נָא יִשְׂרָאֵל, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמְרוּ נָא בֵּית אַהֲרֹן, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמְרוּ נָא בֵּית אַהֲרֹן, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמְרוּ נָא יִרְאֵי יְיָ, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: 
יֹאמְרוּ נָא יִרְאֵי יְיָ, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because 
His loving-kindness is infinite!
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because 
His loving-kindness is infinite!
Say it now, Israel, because His loving-kindness 
is infinite.
Say it now, Israel, because His loving-kindness 
is infinite.
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because 
His loving-kindness is infinite.
Say it now, House of Aaron, because His 
loving-kindness is infinite.
Say it now, House of Aaron, because His 
loving-kindness is infinite.
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because 
His loving-kindness is infinite.
Say it now, all people who are in awe of God, 
because His loving-kindness is infinite.
Say it now, all people who are in awe of God, 
because His loving-kindness is infinite.
Give thanks to God, for He is good, because 
His loving-kindness is infinite.
Pronounced:
Leader: Hoh-doo lah-doh-noi kee tohv kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Others: Hoh-doo lah-doh-noi kee tohv kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh, 
Yoh-mahr nah yis-rah-ehl kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Leader: Yoh-mahr nah yis-rah-ehl kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Others: Hoh-doo lah-doh-noi kee tohv kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh.
Yoh-meh-roo nah bayt ah-hah-rohn kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Leader: Yoh-meh-roo nah bayt ah-hah-rohn kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Others: Hoh-doo lah-doh-noi kee tohv kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh.
Yoh-meh-roo nah yir-ay ah-doh-noi kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Leader: yoh-meh-roo nah yir-ay ah-doh-noi kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh!
Others: Hoh-doo lah-doh-noi kee tohv kee leh-oh-lahm khahs-doh. 
Leader:
Others:
Leader:
Others:
Leader:
Others:
Leader:
Others:

=== Page 92 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
91
מִן
הַמֵּצַר קָרָאתִי יָּהּ, עָנָנִי 
בַמֶּרְחַב יָהּ: יְיָ לִי לֹא אִירָא, 
מַה יַּעֲשֶׂה לִי אָדָם: יְיָ לִי בְּעֹזְרָי, 
וַאֲנִי אֶרְאֶה בְשֹׂנְאָי: טוֹב לַחֲסוֹת בַּייָ, 
מִבְּטֹחַ בָּאָדָם: טוֹב לַחֲסוֹת בַּייָ, מִבְּטֹחַ 
בִּנְדִיבִים: 
כָּל גּוֹיִם סְבָבוּנִי, בְּשֵׁם יְיָ כִּי אֲמִילַם: 
סַבּוּנִי גַם סְבָבוּנִי, בְּשֵׁם יְיָ כִּי אֲמִילַם: 
סַבּוּנִי כִדְבֹרִים דֹּעֲכוּ כְּאֵשׁ קוֹצִים, 
בְּשֵׁם יְיָ כִּי אֲמִילַם: דָּחֹה דְחִיתַנִי 
לִנְפֹּל, וַייָ עֲזָרָנִי: עָזִּי וְזִמְרָת יָהּ, וַיְהִי 
לִי לִישׁוּעָה: 
קוֹל רִנָּה וִישׁוּעָה בְּאָהֳלֵי צַדִּיקִים, 
יְמִין יְיָ עֹשָׂה חָיִל: יְמִין יְיָ רוֹמֵמָה, 
יְמִין יְיָ עֹשָׂה חָיִל: לֹא אָמוּת כִּי 
אֶחְיֶה, וַאֲסַפֵּר מַעֲשֵׂי יָהּ: יַסֹּר יִסְּרַנִּי 
יָּהּ, וְלַמָּוֶת לֹא נְתָנָנִי: 
Out of a tight place, I called to God; God answered 
me with abounding relief. 
God is with me, I will not fear—what can a human 
being do to me? 
God is with me through my helpers, so I can face 
my enemies. 
Better to rely on God than to trust in human 
beings. 
Better to rely on God than to rely on 
philanthropists. 
All nations were at war all around me, but I 
trusted in God and cut through them. 
They surrounded me, they encompassed me, but I 
cut through them by trusting God.
They surrounded me like bees, yet they were 
extinguished like thorns on fire; I cut through 
them by trusting in God. 
They pushed me again and again to fall, but God 
helped me. 
God is my strength and song, and He was there to 
rescue me. 
There’s a sound of joyous song of people who 
have been rescued coming from the tents of the 
righteous, singing: 
“The right hand of God performs valiant deeds!
“The right hand of God is way up there! The right 
hand of God performs valiant deeds!” 
I shall not die, but I shall live and tell the stories 
of God. 
God chastised me, but He didn’t let me die.

=== Page 93 ===

92
פִּתְחוּ לִי שַׁעֲרֵי צֶדֶק, אָבֹא בָם אוֹדֶה 
יָהּ: זֶה הַשַּׁעַר לַייָ, צַדִּיקִים יָבֹאוּ בוֹ: 
אוֹדְךָ כִּי עֲנִיתָנִי, וַתְּהִי לִי לִישׁוּעָה: 
אוֹדְךָ כִּי עֲנִיתָנִי, וַתְּהִי לִי לִישׁוּעָה: 
אֶבֶן מָאֲסוּ הַבּוֹנִים, הָיְתָה לְרֹאשׁ 
פִּנָּה: אֶבֶן מָאֲסוּ הַבּוֹנִים, הָיְתָה 
לְרֹאשׁ פִּנָּה: 
מֵאֵת יְיָ הָיְתָה זֹּאת, הִיא נִפְלָאת 
בְּעֵינֵינוּ: מֵאֵת יְיָ הָיְתָה זֹּאת, הִיא 
נִפְלָאת בְּעֵינֵינוּ: 
זֶה הַיּוֹם עָשָׂה יְיָ, נָגִילָה וְנִשְׂמְחָה בוֹ: 
זֶה הַיּוֹם עָשָׂה יְיָ, נָגִילָה וְנִשְׂמְחָה בוֹ: 
Open for me the gates of righteousness; I will 
enter them and give thanks to God. This is the 
gate of God; the righteous will enter through it.
I thank You for You have answered me, and You 
have been a help to me. I thank You for You have 
answered me, and You have been a help to me.
We were the stone scorned by the builders, but 
we became the main cornerstone of this world. 
We were the stone scorned by the builders, but 
we became the main cornerstone of this world.
This was indeed from God; it is wondrous in our 
eyes. This was indeed from God; it is wondrous in 
our eyes.
This is a day that God has made special; let’s 
rejoice and celebrate on it. This is a day that God 
has made special; let’s rejoice and celebrate on it.
THE SAGES of the Talmud teach that the ultimate exodus for which we all 
yearn could come in one of two ways: If we merit, it could be jump‑s
tarted 
early. But if we don’t, it will just happen in its time no matter what. 
Here we ask God to take the first option.46
The leader reads each of these four lines out loud, and everyone repeats, line by line:
אָנָּא יְיָ הוֹשִׁיעָה נָּא 
אָנָּא יְיָ הוֹשִׁיעָה נָּא: 
אָנָּא יְיָ הַצְלִיחָה נָא: 
אָנָּא יְיָ הַצְלִיחָה נָא: 
O God, please help us right now! 
O God, please help us right now!
O God, please grant us success right now! 
O God, please grant us success right now!

=== Page 94 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
93
Pronounced:
Ah-nah ah-doh-noi hoh-shee-ah nah!
Ah-nah ah-doh-noi hoh-shee-ah nah!
Ah-nah ah-doh-noi hahtz-lee-khah nah!
Ah-nah ah-doh-noi hahtz-lee-khah nah!
בָּרוּךְ 
הַבָּא בְּשֵׁם יְיָ, בֵּרַכְנוּכֶם 
מִבֵּית יְיָ: בָּרוּךְ הַבָּא 
בְּשֵׁם יְיָ, בֵּרַכְנוּכֶם מִבֵּית יְיָ: אֵל יְיָ 
וַיָּאֶר לָנוּ, אִסְרוּ חַג בַּעֲבֹתִים, עַד 
קַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ: אֵל יְיָ וַיָּאֶר לָנוּ, אִסְרוּ 
חַג בַּעֲבֹתִים, עַד קַרְנוֹת הַמִּזְבֵּחַ: 
אֵלִי אַתָּה וְאוֹדֶךּ, אֱלֹהַי אֲרוֹמְמֶךּ: 
אֵלִי אַתָּה וְאוֹדֶךּ, אֱלֹהַי אֲרוֹמְמֶךּ: 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
הוֹדוּ לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
BLESSED is he who comes in the Name of God;
we bless you from the House of God.
Blessed is he who comes in the Name of God;
we bless you from the House of God.
God is Almighty and He shines to us; therefore 
you should tie up your festival-offering until you 
get it to the altar.
God is Almighty, He gave us light; bind the 
festival-offering until you bring it to the horns of 
the altar.
You are my God and I will thank You; my God, I 
will exalt You. 
You are my God and I will thank You; my God, I 
will exalt You.
Thank God, everybody, for He is good, for His 
loving-kindness is infinite.
Thank God, everybody, for He is good, for His 
loving-kindness is infinite.

=== Page 95 ===

94
יְהַלְלוּךָ 
יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ (על) 
כָּל מַעֲשֶׂיךָ, 
וַחֲסִידֶיךָ צַדִּיקִים עוֹשֵׂי רְצוֹנֶךָ, וְכָל 
עַמְּךָ בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרִנָּה יוֹדוּ וִיבָרְכוּ, 
וִישַׁבְּחוּ וִיפָאֲרוּ, וִירוֹמְמוּ וְיַעֲרִיצוּ, 
וְיַקְדִּישׁוּ וְיַמְלִיכוּ אֶת שִׁמְךָ מַלְכֵּנוּ. כִּי 
לְךָ טוֹב לְהוֹדוֹת, וּלְשִׁמְךָ נָאֶה לְזַמֵּר, 
כִּי מֵעוֹלָם וְעַד עוֹלָם אַתָּה אֵל: 
GOD our God, all Your works shall praise You;
Your pious ones, the righteous who do Your will,
and all Your people, the House of Israel,
with joyous song will thank and bless,
laud and glorify, exalt and adore,
sanctify and proclaim the sovereignty of Your 
Name, our King.
For it is good to thank You,
and befitting to sing to Your Name,
for from the beginning to the end of the world
You are Almighty God. 
Up to this point, we’ve read what’s called “The Egyptian Hallel.” Now comes chapter 
136 of Psalms, which is called “The Great Hallel.” This has 26 verses lauding God’s 
infinite kindness, corresponding to the 26 generations of humankind that survived free 
of charge before the Torah was given. Once the Torah was given, there was a whole 
new dimension of accountability to life. That’s an even greater kindness. So, really, life 
is all about God’s infinite loving-kindness. 
Twenty-six is also the sum you get when adding up the numerical value of the letters 
of God’s name. (In Hebrew, every letter has a numerical value.)

=== Page 96 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
95
הוֹדוּ
לַייָ כִּי טוֹב, כִּי לְעוֹלָם 
חַסְדּוֹ: 
 הוֹדוּ לֵאלֹהֵי הָאֱלֹהִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 הוֹדוּ לַאֲדֹנֵי הָאֲדֹנִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְעֹשֵׂה נִפְלָאוֹת גְּדֹלוֹת לְבַדּוֹ, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְעֹשֵׂה הַשָּׁמַיִם בִּתְבוּנָה, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְרוֹקַע הָאָרֶץ עַל הַמָּיִם, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְעֹשֵׂה אוֹרִים גְּדֹלִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 אֶת הַשֶּׁמֶשׁ לְמֶמְשֶׁלֶת בַּיּוֹם, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
אֶת הַיָּרֵחַ וְכוֹכָבִים לְמֶמְשְׁלוֹת בַּלָּיְלָה, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
THANK God, everyone, because He is good—
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Thank the Almighty God of the mighty angels— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Thank the Master of the celestial hosts— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who alone does great wonders— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who made the heavens with intelligence—
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who stretched out the earth above the waters—
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who made the great lights— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
The sun, to rule by day— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
The moon and stars, to rule by night— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who struck Egypt through their firstborn—
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And brought Israel out of their midst— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
With a strong hand and with an outstretched 
arm—because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who split the Sea of Reeds into multiple 
avenues—because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And led Israel through it— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
 לְמַכֵּה מִצְרַיִם בִּבְכוֹרֵיהֶם 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וַיּוֹצֵא יִשְׂרָאֵל מִתּוֹכָם, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 בְּיָד חֲזָקָה וּבִזְרוֹעַ נְטוּיָה, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְגֹזֵר יַם סוּף לִגְזָרִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וְהֶעֱבִיר יִשְׂרָאֵל בְּתוֹכוֹ, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
(יָ)

=== Page 97 ===

96
 וְנִעֵר פַּרְעֹה וְחֵילוֹ בְיַם סוּף 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְמוֹלִיךְ עַמּוֹ בַּמִּדְבָּר, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְמַכֵּה מְלָכִים גְּדֹלִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וַיַּהֲרֹג מְלָכִים אַדִּירִים, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 לְסִיחוֹן מֶלֶךְ הָאֱמֹרִי, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וּלְעוֹג מֶלֶךְ הַבָּשָׁן, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וְנָתַן אַרְצָם לְנַחֲלָה, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 נַחֲלָה לְיִשְׂרָאֵל עַבְדּוֹ, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 שֶׁבְּשִׁפְלֵנוּ זָכַר לָנוּ, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 וַיִּפְרְקֵנוּ מִצָּרֵינוּ, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 נוֹתֵן לֶחֶם לְכָל בָּשָׂר, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
 הוֹדוּ לְאֵל הַשָּׁמָיִם, 
כִּי לְעוֹלָם חַסְדּוֹ: 
And cast Pharaoh and his army into the Sea of 
Reeds—because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who led His people through the desert— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who struck great kings— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And slew super-powerful kings— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Sichon, king of the Amorites— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And Og, king of Bashan— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And gave their land as a heritage— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
A heritage to Israel, His servant— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who remembered us when we were down—
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
And delivered us from our oppressors— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Who gives food to all living creatures— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite!
Thank God of heaven— 
because His loving-kindness is infinite! 
(הָ
(וָ) 
(הָ)

=== Page 98 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
97
Every Breath
נִשְׁמַת 
כָּל חַי תְּבָרֵךְ אֶת 
שִׁמְךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ, 
וְרוּחַ כָּל בָּשָׂר תְּפָאֵר וּתְרוֹמֵם זִכְרְךָ 
מַלְכֵּנוּ תָּמִיד, מִן הָעוֹלָם וְעַד הָעוֹלָם 
אַתָּה אֵל, וּמִבַּלְעָדֶיךָ אֵין לָנוּ מֶלֶךְ 
גּוֹאֵל וּמוֹשִׁיעַ, פּוֹדֶה וּמַצִּיל וּמְפַרְנֵס 
וְעוֹנֶה וּמְרַחֵם בְּכָל עֵת צָרָה וְצוּקָה, 
אֵין לָנוּ מֶלֶךְ אֶלָּא אָתָּה, אֱלֹהֵי 
הָרִאשׁוֹנִים וְהָאַחֲרוֹנִים. אֱלוֹהַּ כָּל 
בְּרִיּוֹת, אֲדוֹן כָּל תּוֹלָדוֹת, הַמְּהֻלָּל 
בְּרוֹב הַתִּשְׁבָּחוֹת, הַמְנַהֵג עוֹלָמוֹ 
בְּחֶסֶד וּבְרִיּוֹתָיו בְּרַחֲמִים. 
וַייָ הִנֵּה לֹא יָנוּם וְלֹא יִישָׁן, הַמְּעוֹרֵר 
יְשֵׁנִים, וְהַמֵּקִיץ נִרְדָּמִים, וְהַמֵּשִׂיחַ 
אִלְּמִים, וְהַמַּתִּיר אֲסוּרִים, וְהַסּוֹמֵךְ 
נוֹפְלִים, וְהַזּוֹקֵף כְּפוּפִים, 
THE breath of every living being shall bless Your 
Name, God our God; 
and the spirit of all flesh shall always glorify and 
exalt the mention of You, our King. 
From the beginning to the end of the world, You 
are Almighty God; and other than You we have no 
king, liberator and rescuer who delivers, saves, 
sustains, answers and is merciful in every time of 
trouble and distress.
We have no king but You.
You are God of the first and the last generations, 
God of all creatures, Lord of all events, who is 
extolled with multiple praises, who directs His 
world with loving-kindness and His creatures 
with compassion. 
Behold, God neither slumbers nor sleeps. He 
arouses those who sleep and awakens those who 
slumber, enables the mute to speak, releases the 
bound, supports the falling and raises up those 
who are bowed. 
לְךָ לְבַדְּךָ אֲנַחְנוּ מוֹדִים 
אִלּוּ פִינוּ מָלֵא שִׁירָה כַּיָּם, וּלְשׁוֹנֵנוּ 
רִנָּה כַּהֲמוֹן גַּלָּיו, וְשִׂפְתוֹתֵינוּ שֶׁבַח 
כְּמֶרְחֲבֵי רָקִיעַ, וְעֵינֵינוּ מְאִירוֹת 
כַּשֶּׁמֶשׁ וְכַיָּרֵחַ, 
To You alone we give thanks. 
Even if our mouths were filled with song as the 
sea, and our tongues with joyous singing like the 
multitudes of its waves; 
If our lips would be filled with praise like the 
expanse of the sky, and our eyes shining like the 
sun and the moon;

=== Page 99 ===

98
וְיָדֵינוּ פְרוּשׂוֹת כְּנִשְׁרֵי שָׁמָיִם, וְרַגְלֵינוּ 
קַלּוֹת כָּאַיָּלוֹת, אֵין אָנוּ מַסְפִּיקִים 
לְהוֹדוֹת לְךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ וֵאלֹהֵי 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ, וּלְבָרֵךְ אֶת שְׁמֶךָ עַל אַחַת 
מֵאֶלֶף אַלְפֵי אֲלָפִים, וְרִבֵּי רְבָבוֹת 
פְּעָמִים, הַטּוֹבוֹת נִסִּים וְנִפְלָאוֹת 
שֶׁעָשִׂיתָ עִמָּנוּ וְעִם אֲבוֹתֵינוּ מִלְּפָנִים: 
מִמִּצְרַיִם גְּאַלְתָּנוּ, יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ, מִבֵּית 
עֲבָדִים פְּדִיתָנוּ, בְּרָעָב זַנְתָּנוּ, וּבְשָׂבָע 
כִּלְכַּלְתָּנוּ, מֵחֶרֶב הִצַּלְתָּנוּ, וּמִדֶּבֶר 
מִלַּטְתָּנוּ, וּמֵחֳלָיִם רָעִים וְנֶאֱמָנִים 
דִּלִּיתָנוּ. עַד הֵנָּה עֲזָרוּנוּ רַחֲמֶיךָ, 
וְלֹא עֲזָבוּנוּ חֲסָדֶיךָ, וְאַל תִּטְּשֵׁנוּ יְיָ 
אֱלֹהֵינוּ, לָנֶצַח. 
If our hands would be spread out like the eagles 
of heaven, and our feet swift like deer, we would 
still be unable to thank You, God our God and God 
of our fathers, and to bless Your Name, 
for even one of the thousands of millions, and 
myriads of myriads, of favors, miracles and 
wonders which You have done for us and for our 
fathers before us. 
You have liberated us from Egypt, God our God.
You have freed us from the house of slavery, 
You have fed us in famine and nourished us in 
plenty; 
You have saved us from the sword and delivered 
us from illness, and raised us from evil and 
lasting diseases. 
Until now Your mercies have helped us, and Your 
kindnesses have not forsaken us; and do not 
abandon us, God our God, forever! 
עַל כֵּן, אֵבָרִים שֶׁפִּלַּגְתָּ בָּנוּ, וְרוּחַ 
וּנְשָׁמָה שֶׁנָּפַחְתָּ בְּאַפֵּינוּ, וְלָשׁוֹן אֲשֶׁר 
שַׂמְתָּ בְּפִינוּ. הֵן הֵם: יוֹדוּ וִיבָרְכוּ 
וִישַׁבְּחוּ וִיפָאֲרוּ, וִירוֹמְמוּ וְיַעֲרִיצוּ, 
וְיַקְדִּישׁוּ וְיַמְלִיכוּ אֶת שִׁמְךָ מַלְכֵּנוּ. 
כִּי כָל פֶּה לְךָ יוֹדֶה, וְכָל לָשׁוֹן לְךָ 
תִשָּׁבַע, וְכָל עַיִן לְךָ תְצַפֶּה, וְכָל 
בֶּרֶךְ לְךָ תִכְרַע, וְכָל קוֹמָה לְפָנֶיךָ 
תִשְׁתַּחֲוֶה, וְכָל הַלְּבָבוֹת יִירָאוּךָ, וְכָל 
קֶרֶב וּכְלָיוֹת יְזַמְּרוּ לִשְׁמֶךָ, כַּדָּבָר 
שֶׁכָּתוּב: כָּל עַצְמוֹתַי תֹּאמַרְנָה, יְיָ, מִי 
כָמוֹךָ, מַצִּיל עָנִי מֵחָזָק מִמֶּנּוּ, וְעָנִי 
וְאֶבְיוֹן מִגֹּזְלוֹ: 
Therefore, the limbs which You have arranged 
within us, and the spirit and soul which You have 
breathed into our nostrils, 
and the tongue which You have placed in our 
mouth—they all shall thank, bless, praise, 
glorify, exalt, adore, sanctify and proclaim the 
sovereignty of Your Name, our king.
For every mouth shall offer thanks to You, 
every tongue shall swear by You, every eye shall 
look to You, every knee shall bend to You, 
all who stand erect shall bow down before You, all 
hearts shall fear You, and every innermost part 
shall sing praise to Your Name, 
as it is written: 
“ All my bones will say, God, who is like You; 
You save the poor from one stronger than he, 
the poor and the needy from one who would rob 
him!”

=== Page 100 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
99
מִי יִדְמֶה לָּךְ, וּמִי יִשְׁוֶה לָּךְ, וּמִי יַעֲרָךְ 
לָךְ, הָאֵל הַגָּדוֹל, הַגִּבּוֹר וְהַנּוֹרָא, אֵל 
עֶלְיוֹן, קֹנֵה שָׁמַיִם וָאָרֶץ. נְהַלֶּלְךָ, 
וּנְשַׁבֵּחֲךָ, וּנְפָאֶרְךָ, וּנְבָרֵךְ אֶת שֵׁם 
קָדְשֶׁךָ, כָּאָמוּר: לְדָוִד, בָּרְכִי נַפְשִׁי 
אֶת יְיָ, וְכָל קְרָבַי אֶת שֵׁם קָדְשׁוֹ: 
Who can be likened to You? Who is equal to You? 
Who can be compared to You? 
The great, mighty, awesome God, God most high, 
owner of heaven and earth! We will laud You, 
praise You and glorify You, and we will bless Your 
holy Name, as it is said: 
“ A Psalm by David; Bless God, O my soul, and all 
that is within me bless His holy Name.”
בְּתַעֲצֻמוֹת עֻזֶּךָ, הַגָּדוֹל הָאֵל 
בִּכְבוֹד שְׁמֶךָ, הַגִּבּוֹר לָנֶצַח, 
וְהַנּוֹרָא בְּנוֹרְאוֹתֶיךָ, הַמֶּלֶךְ הַיּוֹשֵׁב 
עַל כִּסֵּא רָם וְנִשָּׂא: שׁוֹכֵן עַד, מָרוֹם 
וְקָדוֹשׁ שְׁמוֹ, וְכָתוּב: רַנְּנוּ צַדִּיקִים 
בַּייָ, לַיְשָׁרִים נָאוָה תְהִלָּה: בְּפִי 
יְשָׁרִים תִּתְרוֹמָם, וּבְשִׂפְתֵי צַדִּיקִים 
תִּתְבָּרֵךְ, וּבִלְשׁוֹן חֲסִידִים תִּתְקַדָּשׁ, 
וּבְקֶרֶב קְדוֹשִׁים תִּתְהַלָּל: 
רִבְבוֹת וּבְמַקְהֵלוֹת 
עַמְּךָ 
בֵּית יִשְׂרָאֵל, בְּרִנָּה יִתְפָּאֵר שִׁמְךָ 
מַלְכֵּנוּ בְּכָל דּוֹר וָדוֹר. שֶׁכֵּן חוֹבַת כָּל 
הַיְצוּרִים, לְפָנֶיךָ יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ וֵאלֹהֵי 
אֲבוֹתֵינוּ: לְהוֹדוֹת, לְהַלֵּל, לְשַׁבֵּחַ, 
לְפָאֵר, לְרוֹמֵם, לְהַדֵּר, לְבָרֵךְ, 
לְעַלֵּה וּלְקַלֵּס, עַל כָּל דִּבְרֵי שִׁירוֹת 
וְתִשְׁבְּחוֹת דָּוִד בֶּן יִשַׁי עַבְדְּךָ מְשִׁיחֶךָ: 
You are the Almighty God in the intensity of Your 
strength; Great in the glory of Your Name; 
the Mighty forever, and the Awesome in Your 
awesome deeds; the king who sits upon a lofty 
and exalted throne. He who dwells for eternity, 
lofty and holy is His Name. 
And it is written: “Sing joyously to God, you 
righteous; it is beautiful for the upright to offer 
praise.” By the mouth of the upright You are 
exalted; by the lips of the righteous You are 
blessed; by the tongue of the pious You are 
sanctified; and among the holy ones You are 
praised. 
In assemblies of the myriads of Your people, the 
House of Israel, Your Name, our king, shall be 
glorified with song in every generation. For such 
is the obligation of all creatures before You, God 
our God and God of our fathers, to thank, to laud, 
to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to adore, to bless, 
to elevate and to honor You, even beyond all the 
words of songs and praises of David, son of Yishai, 
Your anointed servant.

=== Page 101 ===

100
Final Blessing on the Hallel
וּבְכֵן 
יִשְׁתַּבַּח שִׁמְךָ לָעַד 
מַלְכֵּנוּ, הָאֵל, הַמֶּלֶךְ 
הַגָּדוֹל וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ בַּשָּׁמַיִם וּבָאָרֶץ. כִּי 
לְךָ נָאֶה יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ וֵאלֹהֵי אֲבוֹתֵינוּ 
לְעוֹלָם וָעֶד: שִׁיר וּשְׁבָחָה, הַלֵּל 
וְזִמְרָה, עֹז וּמֶמְשָׁלָה, נֶצַח, גְּדֻלָּה 
וּגְבוּרָה, תְּהִלָּה וְתִפְאֶרֶת, קְדֻשָּׁה 
וּמַלְכוּת: בְּרָכוֹת וְהוֹדָאוֹת לְשִׁמְךָ 
הַגָּדוֹל וְהַקָּדוֹשׁ, וּמֵעוֹלָם עַד 
עוֹלָם אַתָּה אֵל. בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה יְיָ, אֵל 
מֶלֶךְ גָּדוֹל וּמְהֻלָּל בַּתִּשְׁבָּחוֹת, אֵל 
הַהוֹדָאוֹת, אֲדוֹן הַנִּפְלָאוֹת, בּוֹרֵא 
כָּל הַנְּשָׁמוֹת, רִבּוֹן כָּל הַמַּעֲשִׂים, 
הַבּוֹחֵר בְּשִׁירֵי זִמְרָה, מֶלֶךְ יָחִיד חֵי 
הָעוֹלָמִים: 
AND therefore may Your Name be praised 
forever, our King, the great and holy God and 
King in heaven and on earth. For to You, God 
our God and God of our fathers, it is always so 
pleasing to give song and praise, laud and hymn, 
strength and dominion, victory, greatness and 
might, glory, splendor, holiness and sovereignty; 
blessings and thanksgivings to Your great and 
holy Name. From the beginning to the end of the 
world You are Almighty God. Blessed are You, 
God, Almighty God, King, great and extolled in 
praises, God of thanksgivings, Lord of wonders, 
Creator of all souls, Master of all creatures, who 
takes pleasure in songs of praise; the only king, 
the Life of all worlds.

=== Page 102 ===

HALLEL • NIRTZAH
101
Drink the Fourth Cup
Raise your cup and say:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine.
Bah-rookh ah-tah ah-doh-noi eh-loh-hay-noo meh-lekh 
hah-oh-lahm boh-ray pree hah-gah-fehn.
Now lean to the left and drink your entire fourth cup of wine—or at least most of it.
Concluding Blessing for the Wine:
If you drank three ounces (86 ml) or more of wine:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, עַל הַגֶּפֶן וְעַל 
פְּרִי הַגֶּפֶן וְעַל תְּנוּבַת הַשָּׂדֶה וְעַל 
אֶרֶץ חֶמְדָּה טוֹבָה וּרְחָבָה שֶׁרָצִיתָ 
וְהִנְחַלְתָּ לַאֲבוֹתֵינוּ לֶאֱכוֹל מִפִּרְיָהּ 
וְלִשְׂבּוֹעַ מִטּוּבָהּ. רַחֶם נָא יְיָ אֱלֹהֵינוּ 
עַל יִשְׂרָאֵל עַמֶּךָ וְעַל יְרוּשָׁלַיִם 
עִירֶךָ וְעַל צִיּוֹן מִשְׁכַּן כְּבוֹדֶךָ וְעַל 
מִזְבְּחֶךָ וְעַל הֵיכָלֶךָ, וּבְנֵה יְרוּשָׁלַיִם 
עִיר הַקֹּדֶשׁ בִּמְהֵרָה בְיָמֵינוּ, וְהַעֲלֵנוּ 
לְתוֹכָהּ וְשַׂמְּחֵנוּ בָהּ וּנְבָרֶכְךָ בִּקְדֻשָּׁה 
וּבְטָהֳרָה. 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, for the vine and the fruit of the vine, 
for the produce of the field, and for the precious, 
good and spacious land which You have favored 
to give as a heritage to our fathers, to eat of its 
fruit and be satiated by its goodness. 
Have mercy, God our God, on Israel Your people, 
on Jerusalem Your city, on Zion the abode of Your 
glory, on Your altar and on Your Temple. 
Rebuild Jerusalem, the holy city, speedily in our 
days, and bring us up into it, and make us rejoice 
in it, and we will bless You in holiness and purity.
On Shabbat, add:
(וּרְצֵה וְהַחֲלִיצֵנוּ בְּיוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת הַזֶּה (and may it please You to strengthen us on this 
Shabbat day.)
וְזָכְרֵנוּ לְטוֹבָה בְּיוֹם חַג הַמַּצּוֹת הַזֶּה 
כִּי אַתָּה יְיָ טוֹב וּמֵטִיב לַכֹּל וְנוֹדֶה לְּךָ 
עַל הָאָרֶץ וְעַל פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן. בָּרוּךְ אַתָּה 
יְיָ, עַל הָאָרֶץ וְעַל פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
And remember us for good on this day of the 
Festival of Matzot. For You, God, are good and do 
good to all, and we thank You for the land and for 
the fruit of the vine. Blessed are You, God, for the 
land and for the fruit of the vine.

=== Page 103 ===

102
Now everyone calls out:
לְשָׁנָה הַבָּאָה 
בִּירוּשָׁלָיִﬦ: 
�EXT YEA� 
IN 
JERUSALEM!
Leh-shah-nah hah-bah-ah bee-roo-shah-lah-yim!
IN SOME VERSIONS of the Haggadah, there is now a line in which we say 
that the Seder is now concluded, and ask God that next year we celebrate it 
over roasted lamb in Jerusalem. Our version of the Haggadah does not have 
it. 
Why? Because a Jew can never really say that the Seder has ended. We never 
stop leaving Egypt, as every day is another exodus from the bondage of 
mundane existence, headed for the promised land—a world in which every 
human being is absolutely free in body and soul.

=== Page 104 ===

APPENDIX

=== Page 105 ===

104
Friday Night
SHALOM ALEICHEM & ESHET CHAYIL FOR FRIDAY EVENING
When the first night of Passover occurs on a Friday night, recite the following quietly.
Shalom Aleichem
All week long, tradition tells us, you are surrounded by angels. When it comes to Shabbat, however, two spe‑
cial angels arrive—the Shabbat angels. So we greet them. And then, before we eat, we wish them farewell. 
שָׁלוֹם 
עֲלֵיכֶם מַלְאֲכֵי הַשָּׁרֵת 
מַלְאֲכֵי עֶלְיוֹן מִמֶּלֶךְ 
מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ בָּרוּךְ הוּא: 
PEACE be unto you, ministering angels,
Angels from on high,
From the King of kings of kings,
The One Who is Holy, blessed be He.
Repeat three times
בּוֹאֲכֶם 
לְשָׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
הַשָּׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
עֶלְיוֹן מִמֶּלֶךְ מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא: 
ENTER in peace, angels of peace,
Angels from on high,
From the King of kings of kings,
The One Who is Holy, blessed be He.
Repeat three times
בָּרְכוּנִי 
לְשָׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
הַשָּׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
עֶלְיוֹן מִמֶּלֶךְ מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא: 
BLESS me with peace, angels of peace,
Angels from on high,
From the King of kings of kings,
The One Who is Holy, blessed be He.
Repeat three times
צֵאתְכֶם 
לְשָׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
הַשָּׁלוֹם מַלְאֲכֵי 
עֶלְיוֹן מִמֶּלֶךְ מַלְכֵי הַמְּלָכִים הַקָּדוֹשׁ 
בָּרוּךְ הוּא: 
LEAVE in peace, angels of peace,
Angels from on high,
From the King of kings of kings,
The One Who is Holy, blessed be He.
Repeat three times
כִּי מַלְאָכָיו יְצַוֶּה לָּךְ, לִשְׁמָרְךָ בְּכָל 
דְּרָכֶיךָ: 
יְיָ יִשְׁמָר צֵאתְךָ וּבוֹאֶךָ, מֵעַתָּה וְעַד 
עוֹלָם: 
FOR He will instruct His angels on your behalf, to 
guard you in all your ways. 
God will guard your going and your coming now 
and for all time.

=== Page 106 ===

APPENDIX
105
A Woman of Valor
אֵשֶׁת 
חַיִל מִי יִמְצָא, וְרָחֹק 
מִפְּנִינִים מִכְרָהּ. 
בָּטַח בָּהּ לֵב בַּעְלָהּ, וְשָׁלָל לֹא יֶחְסָר. 
גְּמָלַתְהוּ טוֹב וְלֹא רָע, כֹּל יְמֵי חַיֶּיהָ. 
דָּרְשָׁה צֶמֶר וּפִשְׁתִּים, וַתַּעַשׂ בְּחֵפֶץ 
כַּפֶּיהָ. 
הָיְתָה כָּאֳנִיּוֹת סוֹחֵר, מִמֶּרְחָק תָּבִיא 
לַחְמָהּ. 
וַתָּקָם בְּעוֹד לַיְלָה, וַתִּתֵּן טֶרֶף 
לְבֵיתָהּ, וְחֹק לְנַעֲרֹתֶיהָ. 
זָמְמָה שָׂדֶה וַתִּקָּחֵהוּ, מִפְּרִי כַפֶּיהָ 
נָטְעָה כָּרֶם. 
חָגְרָה בְּעוֹז מָתְנֶיהָ, וַתְּאַמֵּץ זְרוֹעֹתֶיהָ. 
טָעֲמָה כִּי טוֹב סַחְרָהּ, לֹא יִכְבֶּה 
בַּלַּיְלָה נֵרָהּ. 
יָדֶיהָ שִׁלְּחָה בַכִּישׁוֹר, וְכַפֶּיהָ תָּמְכוּ 
פָלֶךְ. 
כַּפָּהּ פָּרְשָׂה לֶעָנִי, וְיָדֶיהָ שִׁלְּחָה 
לָאֶבְיוֹן. 
לֹא תִירָא לְבֵיתָהּ מִשָּׁלֶג, כִּי כָל בֵּיתָהּ 
לָבֻשׁ שָׁנִים. 
A woman of valor, who can find?
Her value cannot be compared to pearls. 
Her husband trusts her, and she lacks nothing. 
She returns his goodness, but never his wrongs, 
all the days of her life. 
She seeks out wool and flax. She works on her 
own initiative with her hands.
She is like the merchant ships, bringing her bread 
from afar.
She rises while it is still night and provides food 
for her household, sets tasks for her maids.
She estimates the value of a field, and buys it. 
From her own earnings she plants a vineyard.
She girds herself with strength and stretches out 
her arms courageously.
She reasons that her business is good. Her lamp 
does not go out at night.
She stretches forth her hands onto the distaff, 
and her hands support the spindle.
She opens her hand to the needy and extends her 
hand to the poor. 
Her household does not fear the cold, for they are 
all dressed in crimson.
מַרְבַדִּים עָשְׂתָה לָּהּ, שֵׁשׁ וְאַרְגָּמָן 
לְבוּשָׁהּ. 
נוֹדָע בַּשְּׁעָרִים בַּעְלָהּ, בְּשִׁבְתּוֹ עִם 
זִקְנֵי אָרֶץ. 
She makes beautiful bedspreads for herself; fine 
linen and purple wool are her clothes.
Her husband is known in the gates, sitting with 
the elders of the land.

=== Page 107 ===

106
סָדִין עָשְׂתָה וַתִּמְכֹּר, וַחֲגוֹר נָתְנָה 
לַכְּנַעֲנִי. 
עוֹז וְהָדָר לְבוּשָׁהּ, וַתִּשְׂחַק לְיוֹם 
אַחֲרוֹן. 
פִּיהָ פָּתְחָה בְחָכְמָה, וְתוֹרַת חֶסֶד עַל 
לְשׁוֹנָהּ. 
צוֹפִיָּה הֲלִיכוֹת בֵּיתָהּ, וְלֶחֶם עַצְלוּת 
לֹא תֹאכֵל. 
קָמוּ בָנֶיהָ וַיְאַשְּׁרוּהָ, בַּעְלָהּ וַיְהַלְלָהּ. 
רַבּוֹת בָּנוֹת עָשׂוּ חָיִל, וְאַתְּ עָלִית עַל 
כֻּלָּנָה. 
שֶׁקֶר הַחֵן וְהֶבֶל הַיֹּפִי, אִשָּׁה יִרְאַת יְיָ 
הִיא תִתְהַלָּל. 
תְּנוּ לָהּ מִפְּרִי יָדֶיהָ, וִיהַלְלוּהָ 
בַּשְּׁעָרִים מַעֲשֶׂיהָ: 
She makes a cloak and sells it, and she gives a belt 
to the merchant. 
She is robed in strength and dignity, and 
cheerfully faces whatever may come.
She opens her mouth with wisdom; her tongue 
teaches loving-kindness. 
She tends to the affairs of her household, and 
does not eat the bread of idleness. 
Her children stand up and celebrate her; her 
husband too, and he praises her. 
He says, “Many women have done superbly, but 
you surpass them all!”
Charm is deceitful, beauty is vain, but a God-
fearing woman is to be praised. 
Place before her the fruit of her hands. Wherever 
people gather, her deeds will be her praise.47
מִזְמוֹר 
לְדָוִד, יְיָ רֹעִי לֹא 
אֶחְסָר. בִּנְאוֹת דֶּשֶׁא 
יַרְבִּיצֵנִי, עַל מֵי מְנֻחוֹת יְנַהֲלֵנִי. נַפְשִׁי 
יְשׁוֹבֵב, יַנְחֵנִי בְמַעְגְּלֵי צֶדֶק לְמַעַן 
שְׁמוֹ. גַּם כִּי אֵלֵךְ בְּגֵיא צַלְמָוֶת לֹא 
אִירָא רָע, כִּי אַתָּה עִמָּדִי, שִׁבְטְךָ 
וּמִשְׁעַנְתֶּךָ הֵמָּה יְנַחֲמֻנִי. תַּעֲרֹךְ לְפָנַי 
שֻׁלְחָן נֶגֶד צֹרְרָי, דִּשַּׁנְתָּ בַשֶּׁמֶן רֹאשִׁי, 
כּוֹסִי רְוָיָה. אַךְ טוֹב וָחֶסֶד יִרְדְּפוּנִי כָּל 
יְמֵי חַיָּי, וְשַׁבְתִּי בְּבֵית יְיָ לְאֹרֶךְ יָמִים: 
A Psalm by David. God is my shepherd; I shall 
lack nothing. He makes me lie down in green 
pastures; He leads me beside still waters. He 
revives my soul; He directs me in paths of 
righteousness for the sake of His Name. Even if 
I will walk in the valley of the shadow of death, 
I will fear no evil, for You are with me; Your rod 
and Your staff—they will comfort me. You will 
prepare a table for me before my enemies; You 
have anointed my head with oil; my cup is full. 
Only goodness and kindness shall follow me all 
the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House 
of God for many long years.48
דָּא הִיא סְעוּדָתָא דַחֲקַל תַּפּוּחִין 
קַדִּישִׁין: 
THIS is the meal of the holy Chakal Tapuchin.49

=== Page 108 ===

APPENDIX
107
אַתְקִינוּ 
סְעוּדָתָא 
דִמְהֵימְנוּתָא 
שְׁלֵמָתָא חֶדְוָתָא דְמַלְכָּא קַדִּישָׁא. 
אַתְקִינוּ סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא, דָּא הִיא 
סְעוּדָתָא דַחֲקַל תַּפּוּחִין קַדִּישִׁין, 
וּזְעֵיר אַנְפִּין וְעַתִּיקָא קַדִּישָׁא אַתְיָן 
לְסַעֲדָא בַּהֲדָהּ: 
PREPARE the meal of perfect faith, which is 
the delight of the holy King; prepare the meal 
of the King. This is the meal of the holy Chakal 
Tapuchin, and Z’eir Anpin50 and the holy Ancient 
One50 come to join her in the meal.50
Continue with Friday Night Kiddush for the Seder on page 26.
Passover Kiddush for Daytime
When a festival occurs on a weekday, recite the following before Kiddush. 
(For daytime Kiddush for when Passover is on Shabbat, see the next page.)
אַתְקִינוּ 
סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא 
שְׁלֵמָתָא חֶדְוָתָא 
דְמַלְכָּא קַדִּישָׁא, דָּא הִיא סְעוּדָתָא 
דְּקוּדְשָׁא בְּרִיךְ הוּא וּשְׁכִינְתֵּהּ: 
PREPARE the meal of the King, the complete 
delight of the holy King. This is the meal of the 
Holy One, blessed be He, and His Shechinah.
Lift the cup and hold it in the palm of your right hand, and say:
אֵלֶּה 
מוֹעֲדֵי יְיָ, מִקְרָאֵי קֹדֶשׁ, 
אֲשֶׁר תִּקְרְאוּ אֹתָם 
בְּמוֹעֲדָם: 
THESE are the festivals of God, holy assemblies, 
which you shall proclaim at their appointed 
times.
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
Attention, everyone!
BLESSED are You, God our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine. 
Distribute a bit to each of those assembled, and drink at least one and half ounces 
(45 ml) of the remaining wine while seated.

=== Page 109 ===

108
Passover Kiddush for Daytime  
on Shabbat
When a festival or Chol Hamoed occurs on Shabbat, the following sections are said quietly.
מִזְמוֹר 
לְדָוִד, יְיָ רֹעִי לֹא 
אֶחְסָר: בִּנְאוֹת דֶּשֶׁא 
יַרְבִּיצֵנִי, עַל מֵי מְנֻחוֹת יְנַהֲלֵנִי: נַפְשִׁי 
יְשׁוֹבֵב, יַנְחֵנִי בְמַעְגְּלֵי צֶדֶק לְמַעַן 
שְׁמוֹ: גַּם כִּי אֵלֵךְ בְּגֵיא צַלְמָוֶת לֹא 
אִירָא רָע, כִּי אַתָּה עִמָּדִי, שִׁבְטְךָ 
וּמִשְׁעַנְתֶּךָ הֵמָּה יְנַחֲמֻנִי: תַּעֲרֹךְ לְפָנַי 
שֻׁלְחָן נֶגֶד צֹרְרָי, דִּשַּׁנְתָּ בַשֶּׁמֶן רֹאשִׁי, 
כּוֹסִי רְוָיָה: אַךְ טוֹב וָחֶסֶד יִרְדְּפוּנִי כָּל 
יְמֵי חַיָּי, וְשַׁבְתִּי בְּבֵית יְיָ לְאֹרֶךְ יָמִים: 
A Psalm by David. God is my shepherd; I shall 
lack nothing. He makes me lie down in green 
pastures; He leads me beside still waters. He 
revives my soul; He directs me in paths of 
righteousness for the sake of His Name. Even if 
I will walk in the valley of the shadow of death, 
I will fear no evil, for You are with me; Your rod 
and Your staff—they will comfort me. You will 
prepare a table for me before my enemies; You 
have anointed my head with oil; my cup is full. 
Only goodness and kindness shall follow me all 
the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House 
of God for many long years.
אַתְקִינוּ 
סְעוּדָתָא 
דִמְהֵימְנוּתָא 
שְׁלֵמָתָא חֶדְוָתָא דְמַלְכָּא קַדִּישָׁא: 
אַתְקִינוּ סְעוּדָתָא דְמַלְכָּא, דָּא הִיא 
סְעוּדָתָא דְּעַתִּיקָא קַדִּישָׁא, וַחֲקַל 
תַּפּוּחִין קַדִּישִׁין וּזְעֵיר אַנְפִּין אַתְיָן 
לְסַעֲדָא בַּהֲדֵיהּ: 
PREPARE the meal of perfect faith, which is the 
delight of the holy King; prepare the meal of the 
King. This is the meal of the holy Ancient One, 
and the holy Chakal Tapuchin and Z’eir Anpin 
come to join Him in the meal.
וְשָׁמְרוּ 
בְנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אֶת 
הַשַּׁבָּת, לַעֲשׂוֹת אֶת 
הַשַּׁבָּת לְדֹרֹתָם בְּרִית עוֹלָם. בֵּינִי וּבֵין 
בְּנֵי יִשְׂרָאֵל אוֹת הִיא לְעֹלָם, כִּי שֵׁשֶׁת 
יָמִים עָשָׂה יְיָ אֶת הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת הָאָרֶץ, 
וּבַיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי שָׁבַת וַיִּנָּפַשׁ: 
AND the Children of Israel shall observe the 
Shabbat, establishing the Shabbat throughout 
their generations as an everlasting covenant. It is 
a sign between Me and the children of Israel for 
all time, for in six days God made the heavens and 
the earth, and on the seventh day He ceased from 
work and rested.

=== Page 110 ===

APPENDIX
109
אִם 
תָּשִׁיב מִשַּׁבָּת רַגְלֶךָ, עֲשׂוֹת 
חֲפָצֶךָ בְּיוֹם קָדְשִׁי, וְקָרָאתָ 
לַשַּׁבָּת עֹנֶג, לִקְדוֹשׁ יְיָ מְכֻבָּד, וְכִבַּדְתּוֹ 
מֵעֲשׂוֹת דְּרָכֶיךָ, מִמְּצוֹא חֶפְצְךָ וְדַבֵּר 
דָּבָר. אָז תִּתְעַנַּג עַל יְיָ וְהִרְכַּבְתִּיךָ עַל 
בָּמֳתֵי אָרֶץ, וְהַאֲכַלְתִּיךָ נַחֲלַת יַעֲקֹב 
אָבִיךָ, כִּי פִּי יְיָ דִּבֵּר: 
IF you restrain your feet because of the Shabbat 
from attending to your affairs on My holy day, 
and you call the Shabbat “delight,” the day made 
holy by God “honored,” and you honor it by not 
following your customary ways, refraining from 
pursuing your affairs and from speaking profane 
things, then you shall delight in God, and I will 
make you ride on the high places of the earth, 
and I will nourish you with the heritage of Jacob 
your father; thus the mouth of God has spoken.
דָּא הִיא סְעוּדָתָא דְּעַתִּיקָא קַדִּישָׁא THIS is the meal of the holy Ancient One.
זָכוֹר 
אֶת יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת לְקַדְּשׁוֹ. 
שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים תַּעֲבֹד 
וְעָשִׂיתָ כָּל מְלַאכְתֶּךָ. וְיוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי 
שַׁבָּת לַייָ אֱלֹהֶיךָ, לֹא תַעֲשֶׂה כָל 
מְלָאכָה, אַתָּה וּבִנְךָ וּבִתֶּךָ עַבְדְּךָ 
וַאֲמָתְךָ וּבְהֶמְתֶּךָ, וְגֵרְךָ אֲשֶׁר 
בִּשְׁעָרֶיךָ: כִּי שֵׁשֶׁת יָמִים עָשָׂה יְיָ אֶת 
הַשָּׁמַיִם וְאֶת הָאָרֶץ, אֶת הַיָּם וְאֶת כָּל 
אֲשֶׁר בָּם, וַיָּנַח בַּיּוֹם הַשְּׁבִיעִי— 
REMEMBER the Shabbat day to sanctify it. Six 
days you shall labor and do all your work, but 
the seventh day is Shabbat for God your God; 
you shall not do any work—you, your son or your 
daughter, your manservant or your maidservant, 
or your cattle, or the stranger within your gates. 
For [in] six days God made the heavens, the earth, 
the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the 
seventh day—
Lift the cup and hold it in the palm of your right hand, and say:
עַל כֵּן בֵּרַךְ יְיָ אֶת יוֹם הַשַּׁבָּת 
וַיְקַדְּשֵׁהוּ: 
Therefore God blessed the Shabbat day and made 
it holy.
אֵלֶּה 
מוֹעֲדֵי יְיָ, מִקְרָאֵי קֹדֶשׁ, 
אֲשֶׁר תִּקְרְאוּ אֹתָם 
בְּמוֹעֲדָם: 
THESE are the festivals of God, holy assemblies, 
which you shall proclaim at their appointed 
times.
סַבְרִי מָרָנָן 
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, בּוֹרֵא פְּרִי הַגָּפֶן: 
Attention, everyone!
BLESSED are You, God our God, King of the 
universe, who creates the fruit of the vine.
Distribute a bit to each of those assembled, and drink at least one and half ounces 
(45 ml) of the remaining wine while seated.

=== Page 111 ===

110
Hamotzi
Pour water on each hand three times using a washing cup, covering the entire hand 
each time, from the wrist to the fingertips, and say:
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, אֲשֶׁר קִדְּשָׁנוּ 
תָיו, וְצִוָּנוּ עַל נְטִילַת יָדָיִם:  בְּמִצְוֹ 
BLESSED are You, God, our God, King of the 
universe, who has made us holy with His 
mitzvahs, and commanded us concerning 
washing hands.
The head of the household recites the blessing for bread while holding two matzahs.
בָּרוּךְ 
אַתָּה יְיָ, אֱלֹהֵינוּ מֶלֶךְ 
הָעוֹלָם, הַמּוֹצִיא לֶחֶם 
מִן הָאָרֶץ: 
BLESSED are You, God our God, King of the 
universe, who brings forth bread from the earth.
Distribute a piece to each person, who in turn recites the above blessing before eating.

=== Page 112 ===

111
SOURCES
1. Originally published in The 
C
omplete Story of Passover (Merkos 
Publications).
2. See Likutei Sichot
, vol. 11, p. 21. 
Ramban, Exodus 6:6–7.
3. Rashi, P
esachim 114a. Shulchan Aruch 
Harav 473:14.
4. Talmud
, Pesachim 115b.
5. Haggadah Shel P
esach Im Likutei 
Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim.
6. Haggadah Shel P
esach Im Likutei 
Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim. 
Shulchan Aruch Harav 475:5, 7.
7. Haggadah Shel P
esach Im Likutei 
Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim.
8. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 17, p. 78.
9. Haggadah Shel P
esach Im Likutei 
Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim.
10. Based on Haggadah Shel P
esach Im 
Likutei Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim.
11. Ritv
a, Rid, Orchot Chaim, and others.
12. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 1, p. 244.
13. Haggadah Shel P
esach Im Likutei 
Taamim, Minhagim Ubiurim.
14. Shibolei Haleke
t.
15. Bereishit R
abbah 68:9.
16. See Zev
ach Pesach (Abarbanel).
17. See letter printed at the beginning of 
this Hagg adah. Also, Likutei Sichot, 
vol. 17, p. 264.
18. Talk of the R
ebbe, second night of 
Passover, 5725 (1965) (Haggadah Im 
Biurim, p. 139).
19. Zev
ach Pesach (Abarbanel).
20. Maamar Ki Yishalcha Binc
ha 5738.
21. R. Tzadok HaK
ohen, Haggadah. 
Likutei Sichot, vol. 1, p. 247, and vol. 11, 
p. 2.
22. Gev
urot Hashem (Maharal), chapter 
67.
23. Talk of the R
ebbe, second night of 
Passover 5725 (1965) (Haggadah Im 
Biurim, p. 139).
24. Zev
ach Pesach (Abarbanel). Maaseh 
Nissim (R. Yaakov of Lisa). See, 
however, Abudraham.
25. Pu
blic letter from the Rebbe for 
Passover 5717 (1957).
26. Maimonides, Hilc
hot Avodah Zarah, 
chapter 1.
27. Chov
ot Halevavot, sha’ar 2, chapter 5. 
Yain Malchut, p. 68.
28. R
ashi.
29. Tar
gum Onkelos.
30. A
budraham.
31. Rashi. M
etzudot David. Shibolei 
Haleket.
32. Shnei Luc hot HaBrit, Mesechet 
Pesachim, derush 5.
33. Pu
blic letter from the Rebbe for 
Passover 5718 (1958) (Haggadah 
Shel Pesach Im Likutei Taamim, 
Minhagum Ubiurim, p. 583).
34. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 6, p. 13.
35. Rashi. R
amban. Rabeinu Bachye. 
Torah Ohr, Vayera 15b.
36. Shibolei Haleke
t.
37. See Pri Eit
z Chaim, Birkat Hamazon.
38. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 38, p. 184.
39. See Likutei Sichot
, vol. 16, p. 87.
40. Zev
ach Pesach (Abarbanel).
41. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 17, p. 78.
42. Tan
ya, chapters 31 and 36.
43. Tan
ya, chapter 47. Maharal, Gevurot 
Hashem, chapter 61.
44. Likutei Sichot
, vol. 4, p. 1298.
45. Talmud
, Pesachim 118b.
46. Alshic
h. 
47. Pr
overbs 31:10–31.
48. Psalms 23.
4
9. This is a Ka
bbalistic term for a 
manifestation of the Divine Presence.
50. Zohar II:88a–b
.

=== Page 113 ===

This Haggadah is lovingly dedicated 
in memory of our dear husband, father and grandfather
Tzvi ben Meir and Sonia
 צבי בן מאיר וסוניה
Enrique Novodzelsky
who returned his soul to his Creator  
on the second day of Passover 
16 Nisan of 5784 (2024)
when we begin to count the Omer,  
a time of spiritual growth and preparation for receiving the Torah.
That this is his yahrzeit is deeply significant,  
reflecting the path of faith, strength,  
and dedication that guided his life.
His life was filled with love for Torah,  
devotion to family and friends,  
and a deep connection to the Jewish people.
May the words of this Haggadah,  
read and cherished each year at your family’s Seder table,  
bring merit to his soul and inspiration to future generations.
With everlasting love and gratitude,
The Novodzelsky Family
Mexico/USA

=== Page 114 ===

“In every single generation,
every person should see themselves
as though they actually were liberated 
from Egypt.”
— The T almud